

S. Hrg. 118-250
LEGISLATIVE PRESENTATION OF THE
AMERICAN LEGION AND MULTI VSOs: JWV, TAPS,
NCHV, MOAA, NACVSO, NCAI, VVA, NGAUS, FRA
=======================================================================
JOINT HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
AND THE
COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
MARCH 13, 2024
__________
Formatted for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
55-120 PDF WASHINGTON : 2024
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SENATE COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS
Jon Tester, Montana, Chairman
Patty Murray, Washington Jerry Moran, Kansas, Ranking
Bernard Sanders, Vermont Member
Sherrod Brown, Ohio John Boozman, Arkansas
Richard Blumenthal, Connecticut Bill Cassidy, Louisiana
Mazie K. Hirono, Hawaii Mike Rounds, South Dakota
Joe Manchin III, West Virginia Thom Tillis, North Carolina
Kyrsten Sinema, Arizona Dan Sullivan, Alaska
Margaret Wood Hassan, New Hampshire Marsha Blackburn, Tennessee
Angus S. King, Jr., Maine Kevin Cramer, North Dakota
Tommy Tuberville, Alabama
Tony McClain, Staff Director
David Shearman, Republican Staff Director
----------
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS
Mike Bost, Illinois, Chairman
Aumua Amata Coleman Radewagen, Mark Takano, California, Ranking
American Samoa Member
Jack Bergman, Michigan Julia Brownley, California
Nancy Mace, South Carolina Mike Levin, California
Matthew M. Rosendale, Sr., Montana Chris Pappas, New Hampshire
Mariannette Miller-Meeks, Iowa Frank J. Mrvan, Indiana
Gregory F. Murphy, North Carolina Sheila Cherfilus-McCormick,
Scott Franklin, Florida Florida
Derrick Van Orden, Wisconsin Christopher R. Deluzio,
Morgan Luttrell, Texas Pennsylvania
Juan Ciscomani, Arizona Morgan McGarvey, Kentucky
Elijah Crane, Arizona Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Keith Self, Texas Greg Landsman, Ohio
Jennifer A. Kiggans, Virginia Nikki Budzinski, Illinois
Jon Clark, Staff Director
Matt Reel, Democratic Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
March 13, 2024
Page
REPRESENTATIVES
Hon. Mike Bost, Chairman, U.S. Representative from Illinois...... 2
Hon. Mark Takano, Ranking Member, U.S. Representative from
California..................................................... 8
Hon. Chris Pappas, U.S. Representative from New Hampshire........ 15
Hon. Elijah Crane, U.S. Representative from Arizona.............. 18
Hon. Keith Self, U.S. Representative from Texas.................. 20
Hon. Delia C. Ramirez, U.S. Representative from Illinois......... 20
Hon. Greg Landsman, U.S. Representative from Ohio................ 22
Hon. Mike Levin, U.S. Representative from California............. 43
SENATORS
Hon. Jon Tester, Chairman, U.S. Senator from Montana............. 1
Hon. Angus S. King, Jr., U.S. Senator from Maine................. 14
Hon. Richard Blumenthal, U.S. Senator from Connecticut........... 16
Hon. Margaret Wood Hassan, U.S. Senator from New Hampshire....... 19
INTRODUCTION OF DANIEL J. SEEHAFER
The Honorable Scott Fitzgerald, U.S. Representative from
Wisconsin...................................................... 4
WITNESSES
Panel I
Daniel J. Seehafer, National Commander, The American Legion...... 5
accompanied by
Chanin Nuntavong, National Executive Director
Patricia Harris, Chairwoman, Legislative Commission
Julia Mathis, Director, Legislative Division
Autrey James, Chairman, Veterans Affairs and Rehabilitation
Commission
Tiffany Ellett, Director, Veterans Affairs and Rehabilitation
Division
John Bowen, Chairman, Veterans Employment and Education
Commission
Joe Sharpe, Director, Veterans Employment and Education
Division
Panel II
COL Barry Lischinsky, USA (Ret.), National Commander, Jewish War
Veterans of the USA............................................ 23
Rebecca Harrison Mullaney, Surviving Spouse of Army Captain Ian
Morrison, Tragedy Assistance Program for Survivors............. 25
Kathryn Monet, Chief Executive Officer, National Coalition for
Homeless Veterans.............................................. 27
CDR Rene Campos, USN (Ret.), Senior Director of Government
Relations for Veterans Wounded Warrior Care, Military Officers
Association of America......................................... 29
Panel II (cont.)
Michael McLaughlin, Legislative Director, National Association of
County Veterans Service Officers............................... 30
Melvin Sheldon, Jr., Alternate Vice President-Northwest Region,
National Congress of American Indians.......................... 32
Jack McManus, National President, Vietnam Veterans of America.... 34
Maj. Gen. Frank McGinn (Ret.), President, National Guard
Association of the United States............................... 36
John S. Handzuk, National President, Fleet Reserve Association... 38
APPENDIX
Prepared Statements
Daniel J. Seehafer, National Commander, The American Legion...... 51
COL Barry Lischinsky, USA (Ret.), National Commander, Jewish War
Veterans of the USA............................................ 81
Attachment A--Letter dated November 3, 2023.................... 96
Attachment B--``Special Focus on Antisemitism'' Summary........ 98
Rebecca Harrison Mullaney, Surviving Spouse of Army Captain Ian
Morrison, Tragedy Assistance Program for Survivors............. 100
Kathryn Monet, Chief Executive Officer, National Coalition for
Homeless Veterans.............................................. 135
CDR Rene Campos, USN (Ret.), Senior Director of Government
Relations for Veterans Wounded Warrior Care, Military Officers
Association of America......................................... 148
Michael McLaughlin, Legislative Director, National Association of
County Veterans Service Officers............................... 173
Attachment--NACVSO Priorities for the 118th Congress........... 178
Melvin Sheldon, Jr., Alternate Vice President-Northwest Region,
National Congress of American Indians.......................... 180
Jack McManus, National President, Vietnam Veterans of America.... 186
Maj. Gen. Frank McGinn (Ret.), President, National Guard
Association of the United States............................... 197
John S. Handzuk, National President, Fleet Reserve Association... 203
Statements for the Record
Hon. Delia C. Ramirez, U.S. Representative from Illinois......... 223
American Defenders of Bataan and Corregidor Memorial Society, Jan
Thompson, President............................................ 225
Black Veterans Empowerment Council, Inc., Shawn Deadwiler,
President and Chairman of the Board............................ 229
D'Aniello Institute for Veterans and Military Families (IVMF) at
Syracuse University............................................ 238
Gold Star Wives of America, Inc.................................. 247
Jose D. Acevedo, U.S. Navy Veteran, Juris Doctor................. 251
Military Order of the Purple Heart of the U.S.A., Ralph
``Carder'' Ferguson, National Commander........................ 263
Minority Veterans of America, Lindsay Church, Executive Director
and Co-Founder; Peter Perkowski, Legal and Policy Director..... 276
Modern Military Association of America, Rachel Branaman,
Executive Director............................................. 294
Quality of Life Foundation....................................... 304
Reserve Organization of America, Maj. Gen. Jeffrey E. Phillips,
U.S. Army (Ret.)............................................... 311
Veterans Education Success....................................... 333
LEGISLATIVE PRESENTATION OF THE AMERICAN LEGION AND MULTI VSOS: JWV,
TAPS, NCHV, MOAA, NACVSO, NCAI, VVA, NGAUS, FRA
----------
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 13, 2024
U.S. House of Representatives, and
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The Joint Committees met, pursuant to notice, at 10:11
a.m., in Room 390, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Mike
Bost, Chairman of the Veterans' Affairs Committee, presiding.
Present:
Representatives Bost, Crane, Self, Takano, Levin, Pappas,
Ramirez, Deluzio, McGarvey, and Landsman.
Senators Tester, Brown, Blumenthal, Hassan, and King.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JON TESTER, CHAIRMAN,
U.S. SENATOR FROM MONTANA
Chairman Tester . We will call this hearing to
order. Chairman Bost will be here shortly, but I think we
should get going here.
Commander Seehafer, thank you for being here. We appreciate
the wisdom you are going to pass on to us here shortly, and we
welcome the entire American Legion this morning.
I want to thank the Legion for inviting me to be a speaker
at their convention a few weeks ago. Hearing from your members
is vital to shaping our policy and overseeing the actions of
the VA.
Commander Seehafer, thank you for being here. Thank you for
the Legion's continued advocacy on behalf of our Nation's
veterans. The American Legion has been a key partner in passing
critical legislation for veterans and their families over the
past few Congresses, including the Deborah Sampson Act, the
Hannon Act, and most recently, the PACT Act.
The PACT Act was a heavy lift, and I am here to say we
couldn't have done it without you and the entire VSO community,
so give yourselves a hand. Thank you very much.

But the fact is our work here is far from being done. There
are a number of issues requiring legislative action, from
veteran suicide to homelessness to education benefits. We need
the Legion's input and we need your support to get these
priorities across the finish line.
The suicide rates across the country, and particularly in
the veterans community, continue to be at unacceptable levels,
and we need to work together to help address the persistent
issues causing veterans to feel like they have been left
behind. That is why I introduced S. 928, the Not Just a Number
Act, to identify nonhealthcare factors and to help prevent
suicide.
No veteran should have to worry about finding a safe place
to sleep at night. My CHARGE Act seeks to give the VA the tools
it needs to tackle veterans' homelessness.
Members of the National Guard and Reserve should be earning
the same educational benefits as their active duty
counterparts. I was proud to join my colleagues up here in
introducing the GI Bill Parity Act, giving reserve component
servicemembers credit for their time in uniform.
But these legislative priorities and increased benefits
need to be safeguarded from those that are looking to prey on
our veterans. Veterans should not have to pay for assistance
when seeking VA benefits. I hope to hear from you today about
how we can work together to go after predatory claims
consultants looking to get rich on the earned benefits of our
veterans, like the folks in this room.
For the veterans here today, thank you for your service and
thank you for your work on behalf of fellow veterans.
With that, Chairman Bost, good to see you here, man.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE BOST, CHAIRMAN,
U.S. REPRESENTATIVE FROM ILLINOIS
Chairman Bost . You know, for some reason I have
to figure out where the buttons are in here. For some reason,
they like want us to vote. I don't understand.
Chairman Tester. Constitutional duty, too?
Chairman Bost. Yes, it is all that.
Chairman Tester. Okay.
Chairman Bost. Hey, good morning, everyone. And I want to
thank you for being here. And I would like to welcome Senator
Chairman Tester and thank him for going ahead and kicking this
off, and Ranking Member Moran, who I am sure will be here
shortly. I want to thank you all for joining us.
And a good morning to all of my fellow Legionnaires. And,
you know, as you can tell, I am a proud member of the
Murphysboro, Illinois, Paul Stout American Legion Post 127.
 Now, let me tell you a little bit about our post.
It has been around quite some time. And Paul Stout was a
private who fought in Belleau Wood, fought in Belleau, and then
fell in the next battle up the road. And we have been around
for quite a few years under the name Paul Stout. So much so
that when we celebrated the hundredth anniversary, we actually
had a Paul Stout beer made. So, at any rate, so, and I need to
let you know I am paid up on my dues, just so you know.
 Okay.
I would like to welcome all the American Legion national
and all the members and our national commander, Daniel
Seehafer, and his wife, Stacey, for being here today. I would
also like to give a shout-out to all the American Legion
auxiliary president, Lisa Williamson, and the national
commander of the Sons, Donald Lee Hall, or Junior as he is
known, for being here today as well. And a special welcome to
everyone from Illinois. If you can raise and say, hey, we are
here, just so you--there we go. All right.

So, as most of you know, being the Chairman is not a
responsibility I take lightly. It is very, very personal to me,
and I know it is personal to you. To explain to you if you
don't know, I am a Marine. My grandfather on my mother's side,
Marine, Korean War. My dad and his brothers were all Army,
Korean War. My uncle was Vietnam, Marine. He was the victim of
the ultimate oxymoron, friendly fire. He did not pass. He has
had a very successful life, but he does have a 100 percent
rating, and the VA has been very good to him over his life
after his time of service. My son is a lieutenant colonel in
the Marine Corps right now, Reservist, but was active for many
years. And my grandson is an F-18 mechanic, a corporal in
Miramar, California. So it is very, very personal to me as it
is to you.
I know the sacrifices you have made. I know the sacrifices
that your family has made. And I know at the end of the day,
you just want access to healthcare and benefits and services
you have earned without a big headache. Our Veterans Service
Organizations community play a vitally important role in making
all of that happen.
You know where VA is falling short because you hear it from
the boots on the ground that you talk to every day and all
around this country, you know what the problems are. And you
also know that the statement is, if you have seen one VA, you
have seen one VA, because they all have unique issues and
problems. Some are wonderful, some we got to work on.
But make no mistake, your advocacy here in DC and across
the country really makes a difference. And I am proud of all
that we have accomplished together over the last few years,
including the President signing the bipartisan PACT Act and
putting that into law.
Now, this is the largest expansion of healthcare and
benefits for veterans and their families in recent history, and
we are going to make sure VA gets it right. Because sometimes,
I don't know, if you know this, we pass laws, then we have to
do a follow-up and make sure they are actually doing what we
said to do. So as Chairman, it is my top priority of mine to
hold the VA accountable for you, the men and women who serve,
no matter what. So please call or visit our website to report
waste, fraud, or abuse. We need your help to make the VA what
you deserve.
Looking ahead, I am going to be focusing on improvements
where we can to modernizing the delivery of care and services
from the VA. We have made great progress in identifying
improvements that could be made for the veterans' community
care program through our oversight efforts. We are also working
on legislation to increase accessibility and accountability in
the VA healthcare system. As Chairman and as a fellow veteran,
I will keep pushing the VA to be more transparent with veterans
when they are deciding their best option for care, whether in
the VA or in the community.
Now, right now we are in a bipartisan negotiation to get a
package of veterans bills to the President's desk. This
comprehensive package includes many of American Legion's
priorities, like expansion of the VA's long-term care service
to put veterans in control of where they want to live out the
rest of their days, strengthening the community care program,
expansion of VET TEC education program, and there is so much
more we are going to be working on. We will get the package
done this year, but our work is nowhere near being finished. We
know we have got still a lot to do.
My door will always continue to be open to each of you
because veterans are still fighting a VA bureaucracy to access
the healthcare they want when and where they need it; facing
challenges receiving timely healthcare and services in rural
and remote areas; dealing with underperforming VA employees who
don't always have the veteran's best interest in mind; and
dealing with the effects of a 20-year war and accessing
quality, timely, comprehensive mental healthcare and support.
Now, these might seem like small things, but it comes down
to this. They impact veterans' lives every single day. I
promise to keep up the fight that we are all in together. And
now it is not the time to take our foot off the accelerator.
And I will ensure that VA gets the budget it needs to complete
the goal.
I look forward to meeting the mission alongside of every
one of you. Thank you again for being here today.
Chairman Bost. And with that, I was going to yield to
Chairman Tester, but obviously he has already finished his
opening remarks. I was going to say something and allow Mr.
Takano and then yield to Senator Moran. Obviously, I am the one
here.
So, what I would like to do at this time is say welcome and
yield to our gentleman from Wisconsin, Representative
Fitzgerald, to introduce the American Legion's commander.
INTRODUCTION BY THE HON. SCOTT FITZGERALD
Mr. Fitzgerald. Thank you, Chairman Bost. It is great to be
with you here today. Especially great to be sitting here
alongside American Legion National Commander Daniel Seehafer,
who I am very proud to be introducing today. I have always
revered the American Legion for their work, from my days as a
recruit at Fort Jackson all throughout my career to finishing
up as a battalion commander with the U.S. Army Reserves.
It is leaders like Commander Seehafer who keep the mission
alive. Mr. Seehafer was elected national commander of the
American Legion last August in Charlotte, North Carolina,
during the 104th National Convention. For any of you familiar
with him, you know, he likes to say it is personal when talking
about the American Legion's mission of serving veterans and
their families.
Though he serves all veterans, Mr. Seehafer is a
Wisconsinite through and through. He was born and raised in
Merrill, Wisconsin, and lives in Beaver Dam, Wisconsin, today
with his children and, as mentioned earlier by the Chairman,
his wife Stacey, who is a member of the American Legion
Auxiliary Unit 157. So obviously it is kind of a family effort.
Mr. Seehafer is an ordained minister from Wisconsin, where
he also earned his American Legion eligibility through service
in the U.S. Navy and Navy Reserve. He even served as a military
chaplain. Commander Seehafer was installed as assistant pastor
of St. Stephen's Lutheran Church in Horicon in 1997 and
continues to serve as administrative pastor of the church and
its school.
A member of American Legion Post 157 in Horicon, Commander
Seehafer served in a number of American Legion offices at every
level, including national chaplain and commander of the
Department of Wisconsin.
As if this wasn't impressive enough, Mr. Seehafer earned an
Outstanding Heroism Award for administering the Heimlich
maneuver to a choking victim at an American Legion dinner. Like
I said, his dedication to service knows no bounds.
I would be remiss if I didn't take a moment to also
recognize Mr. Seehafer and the American Legion for the
important advocacy work that they do here in Congress on behalf
of veterans and their families. The PACT Act immediately comes
to mind. I was certainly proud, like other Members of Congress,
to support this bipartisan legislation. And thanks to the help
of folks like Mr. Seehafer, Commander Seehafer, we got the
legislation across the finish line to enact the most
significant expansion of benefits and services for toxic-
exposed veterans.
His qualifications and record truly say it all. The
American Legion is lucky to have Commander Seehafer as a
leader. And we as members of the American Legion are fortunate
enough to be able to not only hear his testimony today, but
look forward to his actions in the future.
With that, it is my great privilege and honor to welcome a
fellow Wisconsinite to this hearing on behalf of the American
Legion.
I yield back.
Chairman Bost. Thank you. And, Commander, you are
recognized for 10 minutes for your opening statement.
PANEL I
----------
STATEMENT OF DANIEL J. SEEHAFER, NATIONAL COMMANDER, THE
AMERICAN LEGION ACCOMPANIED BY CHANIN NUNTAVONG, NATIONAL
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR; PATRICIA HARRIS, CHAIRWOMAN, LEGISLATIVE
COMMISSION; JULIA MATHIS, DIRECTOR, LEGISLATIVE DIVISION;
AUTREY JAMES, CHAIRMAN, VETERANS AFFAIRS AND REHABILITATION
COMMISSION; TIFFANY ELLET, DIRECTOR, VETERANS AFFAIRS AND
REHABILITATION DIVISION; JOHN BOWEN, CHAIRMAN, VETERANS
EMPLOYMENT AND EDUCATION COMMISSION; AND JOE SHARPE, DIRECTOR,
VETERANS EMPLOYMENT AND EDUCATION DIVISION
Mr. Seehafer. First of all, thank you, Representative
Fitzgerald, for being here. I appreciate that, taking time out
of your schedule.
Mr. Chairman, with your permission, I would like to begin
by introducing the individuals who are sitting on this panel
with me: our legislative chair, Patricia Harris, and director,
Julia Mathis; our Veterans Affairs and Rehabilitation director,
Tiffany Ellet; our Veterans Employment and Education chair, Jay
Bowen, and director, Joe Sharpe; and our executive director,
Chanin Nuntavong.
Now, I want the representatives of our nearly 3 million
American Legion family members to please stand and be
recognized. First of all, our national officers serving with me
this year . Next, our past national commanders
; our national president of the American Legion
Auxiliary, Lisa Williamson ; our national commander
of the Sons of the American Legion, Donald Lee J. R. Hall, Jr.
 And finally, it is of extreme importance for me to
recognize my wife once again, Stacey, who is my biggest
supporter and ally, who I deeply love.

Now that you met our leaders, let's get to the purpose and
the relevance of this testimony. Chairman Bost and Ranking
Member Takano, Chairman Tester and Ranking Member Moran, it is
my honor and privilege to share with you and your Committees
the American Legion's top priorities for the second session of
the 118th Congress.
In my opening statement, however, I will address something
that is more than a priority to us. In fact, I heard it
described as a marketing campaign and cool slogan to a catchy
phrase and even a worthwhile initiative. However, none of these
words appropriately reflect what ``Be the One'' is to the
American Legion family. Rather, it is a mission, our mission,
to change lives and save lives. And yes, Chairman, it is
personal.
There is no single deed that the American Legion family can
accomplish that outweighs the prevention of a veteran from
taking their own life. Nothing. We know firsthand that we have
saved lives. Legionnaires like Jeff Freeman from Post 190 in
Rippen, California, continues to live life now with purpose and
relevance. Last year, at one of our Be the One events, he told
us that the Legion saved my life. You see, it was 10 years
after he attempted suicide. He is not a victim, but a suicide
survivor. That is what Be the One is. It is our mission to be
the one to save one.
We do this then by destigmatizing the issue of mental
health. Veterans value courage and it takes courage to ask for
help. However, the American Legion doesn't sit back and just
wait. Instead, we take a proactive approach and ask veterans if
they are okay. That is what we call the buddy check. We thank
Congress and Members of this critical Committee for passing
legislation directing the Department of Veterans Affairs to
conduct its own National Buddy Check Week, and they did thanks
to you. Thanks to you. Just like you did with the PACT Act.
Again, thank you for that.

Now, when we look at the buddy check, without a doubt, it
made an impact. Personal contact changes lives and personal
contact saves lives, period. A major purpose of the American
Legion's Be the One mission is to raise awareness. We have lost
more than 135,000 veterans to suicide since 9/11. This is well
more than all the American deaths incurred during the entire
Korean War, Vietnam War, Gulf War, and the Global War on
Terrorism combined. A veteran is 50 percent more likely to take
their own life than a person who has never served in the
military. This must stop!

So, what can Congress do? Well, I am so, so glad you asked.
Congress can be the one to enhance the military experience by
supporting quality of life legislation. Be the one then to
expand access to affordable childcare, increase funding for
barracks and family housing, and ensure timely access to mental
healthcare.
Congress can also be the one to improve oversight of
military sexual trauma and ensure that both the departments of
Veterans Affairs and Defense provide timely, meaningful, and
sensitive treatment for those who have experienced it.
And Congress can be the one to expand research and access
to alternative treatments and therapies. The National Survey on
Drug Use and Health shows that in 2021, approximately 2.8
million veterans experienced an illicit drug or alcohol use
disorder, and 92.4 percent did not receive treatment. We urge
you to consider legislation that would effectively address TBI
and PTSD.
We also know that if services are offered, services will be
used. In 2023, the first year that VA enacted a new policy
offering free emergency suicide prevention care in and outside
the VA system, 49,714 veterans accessed this benefit, saving a
projected $64 million in healthcare costs.
When I was first elected last year in August, one of my
very first visits not only impacted me personally, but really
solidified the importance of our mission, a mission, again, of
purpose and relevance; again, changing lives and saving lives.
After my remarks in Tennessee, a veteran came up to me and
said, ``Commander, what you talked about, that was me. That was
me.'' You see, he was wounded by an IED and was not only
struggling with PTSD, but TBI as well. As he left the military
and transitioned into the civilian life, the pressures of life
itself, family expenses and needs, did not stop just because he
was injured. He didn't think his family would stick around. And
honestly, he was starting to question if he should stay around,
too.
In fact, this wheelchair-bound veteran wheeled himself into
another organization and requested assistance, not just with
hands out, asking for money, but direction. However, the
members never looked up from their card game. But one voice
penetrated his soul, saying, I fought my war. I can't fight
yours.
With feelings of hopelessness, desperation, and rejection,
he decided to end his life. So he put a revolver in his mouth
and pulled the trigger not once, but twice. Both times,
however, it did not fire. I personally believe that God gave
many reasons why it did not go off.
First of all, not only placing American Legion Post 172 in
Georgia in his path, but empowering, empowering their
leadership to take him in that caring embrace that they gave
and connecting him with the right people at the right time,
which not only saved his home and family, but him, also. So
that this young veteran would realize his purpose and relevance
in life as he now leads his post as their commander. Talk about
changing a life and saving a life.
And finally, it is for us. It is for us even today, because
we, too, can be the one to change a life and even save a life
in what we do for our veterans and their families. This, this,
ladies and gentlemen, is why we have Be the One.

In addition to our Be the One mission, the American Legion
has other priorities, which we submit as part of our written
testimony here today. Criminally punishing companies that prey
on veterans and their families is extremely important. And we
see a constant barrage of advertisements from unaccredited
actors who charge excessive fees for services on claims that
should be provided at no cost, requiring all separating
servicemembers to participate in a robust transition assistance
program which would cover employment and business
opportunities, educational resources, housing options, health
benefits, and other quality of life topics that can improve
mental wellness and reduce suicide.
Ensuring that every, yes, every branch of our military is
paid in the event of a government shutdown. The last long
shutdown caused a pay interruption for the U.S. Coast Guard.
This should never, ever happen again.
Pundits and self-proclaimed experts tell us not to be--or
that is not to expect, rather, major legislation from a divided
Congress during a Presidential election year. Well, Chair and
everyone, I do reject that analysis. Veterans issues have
traditionally unified Congress because in your hearts we know
you love this country, we know, and truly wish to serve
veterans. We know you do that just as veterans have served
America. A major step in this direction would be the passage
then of a budget, a complete budget, not another CR.
Today, Russia is on the march, illegal crossings at our
southern border remain high, and veterans continue to fight
that plague of suicide. My friends, any member of the military
will tell you that you cannot move forward without a plan. Yes,
you may win a firefight here and there, but you will not
achieve your overall mission without a plan. For the sake of
veterans, their families, and for all Americans, I implore you,
I implore you to put partisan politics aside and give us your
plan.
Chairman Bost, Chairman Tester, right, and Members of the
Committees on Veterans' Affairs, on behalf of the American
Legion, I thank you for giving the Nation's largest Veterans
Service Organization the opportunity to share our priorities. I
welcome any questions you have for me, our commission chairs,
and, of course, our national staff.
And I end by asking you to join the American Legion. No, I
take that back. To join the American Legion family in changing
lives and saving lives today and now. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Seehafer appears on page 51
of the Appendix.]
Chairman Bost. First off, thank you for that opening. And
before we go to questions, we are joined by Ranking Member
Takano. It is kind of busy this morning and things are jumping
around, but he has an opening statement and he is recognized
for that.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARK TAKANO,
RANKING MEMBER, U.S. REPRESENTATIVE FROM CALIFORNIA
Mr. Takano. Well, thank you, Chairman Bost.
And I would like to start by extending a welcome to our
Senate colleagues on the House side this morning. It is a
pleasure to be here today, and it is really great to see all
the VSO members and veteran advocates in our annual discussion
of priorities.
I am very pleased to see National Commander Daniel
Seehafer. Thank you for your opening statement, and other
representatives of the American Legion, and to learn about your
legislative priorities for the second session of the 118th
Congress.
And I know that the Legion held its fly-in a couple of
weeks ago, but if there are any Californians here today, I
extend a hardy welcome. So, Californians, let me know if you
are here. Great.

I also welcome Korean-American Vietnam veterans from New
York and Washington and the Washington area, Korean-American
veterans. Thank you.

I look forward to hearing from the VSOs represented on our
second panel. And during the previous two Congresses, I made it
my mission to diversify the voices that are represented at
these hearings. We were successfully able to include several
organizations whose demographic groups had never been
represented in these critical conversations, and I am grateful
to see that Tribal veterans continue to be represented. But I
am disappointed that none of this year's invitees specifically
represent the voices of veterans of color, LGBTQ+, and other
minority veterans. Creating a VA that is welcome to all
veterans is one of my priorities, and getting there starts with
ensuring those veterans are represented in conversations about
veterans issues and priorities.
These hearings are our opportunity to hear from
organizations like yours about what issues are impacting
veterans and what Congress needs to do to help. I read in the
testimony that one of Vietnam Veterans of America's priorities
is honoring past VVA National President Thomas Corey. For
almost 40 years, Mr. Corey was a tireless advocate for Vietnam
veterans and veterans of every generation. His passing a couple
of months ago was deeply felt in the veteran community. I know
that Congressman Mast has introduced a bill to name the VA
Medical Center in West Palm Beach, Florida, the Thomas H. Corey
Healthcare System of West Palm Beach.
I also want to thank the Vietnam veteran community for its
support of the Korean American Valor Act. It became law in no
small part because of the advocacy of this community and the
support of this community, and we look forward to working with
you all to ensure its timely implementation.
I also want to take a moment to wholeheartedly support the
effort and commit to working with Chairman Bost to getting it
brought to the floor quickly. What I am referring to is the
Mast legislation to rename the West Palm Beach Medical Center.
I look forward to discussing other priorities of the
American Legion and the organizations on our second panel this
morning. It was during these very hearings a couple of years
ago that the VSO spoke in a unified voice and gave us our
marching orders to finally get my PACT Act passed. The Honoring
our PACT Act has been called the single biggest expansion of
veterans' healthcare and benefits in generations. The Biden
administration believes so strongly in the importance of this
legislation that it accelerated the PACT Act's timeline to make
all veterans who were potentially exposed to toxins eligible to
enroll in VA healthcare years ahead of schedule.
We will continue to evaluate places where the PACT Act can
and should be expanded. For example, there is new evidence
supporting toxic exposure claims at K-2, and there are Blue
Water Navy veterans who served outside of the demarcation line,
but are experiencing the same disabilities and diseases as
sailors who served a mere few miles away.
The PACT Act was never meant to be a one and done. We will
keep working to make it as comprehensive as possible. We knew
that when we passed the PACT Act, and we still know, that
addressing the effects of toxic exposure was going to be
expensive. But that was the cost of war. That is the cost of
war. And when we asked servicemembers to put their lives on a
line, we didn't ask about the cost. And we shouldn't nickel and
dime veterans now that they are home. We must ensure that the
funds needed for healthcare and benefits for toxic-exposed
veterans are always available.
We must not go back to making veterans compete with other
veterans or with other discretionary spending programs that
serve all Americans. I give you my word that I will continue to
fight to prevent that from happening.

I also remain focused on ending veteran homelessness. And
over the last couple of years, VA has made great progress in
getting veterans housed. There are policy tools that reduce
homelessness among veterans that we know work, and we have
allowed VA's authority to use those tools to expire. We owe it
to our veterans to ensure that they have a roof over their
heads and a place to live, so we must get the Home Act passed.

Now, veteran suicide has also been a priority for me. Well,
let's say ending veteran suicide has been a priority for me and
my colleagues on this Committee. We must ensure that VA has the
tools and resources it needs to reach all veterans who are
struggling. And I will continue to fight to ensure that VA is
best positioned to address veteran suicide.
And, Commander, your remarks were just so extremely
poignant on this point, and, you know, I share that commitment
with you all. And thanks to the implementation of the COMPACT
Act, over the past year, over 50,000 veterans have called 988
and have received emergency mental healthcare. So I am very
grateful that we have seen that happen, and that happened on a
bipartisan basis as well.
We will continue to work with organizations like yours to
ensure that no veteran slips through the cracks. The grassroots
nature of your organization makes it much easier for us to
ensure that we have eyes on as many veterans as possible. I
know we can work together to make progress on reducing veteran
suicide.
I look forward to working with my colleagues to gain
momentum on veterans legislation before this Congress ends. And
I really hope that we can set aside issues that do not directly
benefit veterans and instead focus on what we are here to do.
We are here to ensure that the brave men and women who have
given so much to this country receive the high-quality
healthcare and benefits they have earned.
So I thank you all for being here, and I look forward to
hearing from you all.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Bost. Thank you, Ranking Member.
And we are going to go to questions, and I will recognize
myself for 3 minutes. I had to check with staff to see what was
going on.
Commander, you know, I was pleased that we were able to get
my bill to protect veterans' Second Amendment rights signed
into law through the VA appropriation bill, and I am grateful
for the American Legion's support. In addition to protecting
veterans' constitutional rights, how is it important to
veterans' confidence level in the VA that that passed?
Mr. Seehafer. Chairman, thank you for the question. And
again, I am proud to say that since 1919, and again, when we
raised our hand, we definitely made that commitment, didn't we,
to uphold and defend that Constitution. And we will continue.
Chairman Bost. And I thank you for that. I believe that
with the passage of that, many of you that live in flyover
country, that is what we refer to the middle part of this
United States, where I live, many of our veterans chose not to
use the VA because of the fear of the way they had implemented
that and been doing that for 30 years.
But I am also going to ask, so, last year, the American
Legion testified before our Committee in support of H.R. 4278,
the Restore VA Accountability Act. Now, why does the VA need
these authorities to hold its small percentage of bad employees
in check?
Mr. Seehafer. Chairman, again, thank you for that and,
again, your passion for serving veterans and their families. I
am going to ask my director, Tiffany Ellet, for further
comment.
Ms. Ellet. Thank you, Commander. Thank you for the
question, Mr. Chairman. It is good to see you.
Chairman Bost. Good to see you.
Ms. Ellet. It is really important that VA is full of staff
that is going to take care of our veterans, one on the side of
VA staff to be protected, but the other on the side of having
that staff that is going to be there to protect our veterans.
We do support your bill and thank you for introducing it. It is
a really important thing to put out there.
I did sit in on the AFGE-CIO meetings last--a couple of
weeks ago, and there was an issue that was raised that we would
like to talk to your office about with this piece of
legislation that some of the staff are worried about leadership
or other personnel using this legislation to get rid of people
on a vendetta basis.
Chairman Bost. I understand.
Ms. Ellet. So they are concerned about that and we are
concerned about that as we do want our VA employees to be there
because we want retention. Right? So we would like to talk to
your office and work with you in getting this piece of
legislation, so it is protecting both the veteran and the VA.
Chairman Bost. Wonderful. We look forward to working with
you with that.
Commander, we have got a very short time here, but what are
some ways to increase accountability at DoD to make sure we are
taking care of every servicemember's needs during their
transition? Because I tell people that, you know, we had a TAP
program whenever I got out in 1982, and the colonel tapped me
on the shoulder and said, see you later . The TAP
program, if you want to expand where we want to----
Mr. Seehafer. Right. Again, Chairman, thank you for that.
You know, the TAP program is essential. And I think the
whole concept of this is that we have the resources, but we are
not implementing and giving the time. The time. When we are
talking about our officers, and I even talked to Chairman
Tester on this as well, you know, when I have the officers two
years or whatever, that amount of time, and they are looking to
the future already. What can I do to--you know, where am I
going to live? How can I get this job? All these things. But
the enlisted don't have that time. So, you know, we can't just
throw the program away, obviously, because I know, I heard
rumblings about something like that, or it is no good or it is
a waste of time I even read. It is not. The resources are
there. Let's use them. Implementation. Give our enlisted the
time.

Chairman Bost. Thank you. With that, Chairman Tester, you
are recognized for 3 minutes.
Chairman Tester. Thank you, Chairman.
Commander, you are absolutely right. And I think that you
know what many of us have found out over the last few years and
that transition time and the mental health issues that we are
seeing amongst our veterans are very closely connected. So we
appreciate everything the American Legion is doing.
I want to talk about toxic exposure for just a moment. More
than 694,000 toxic-exposed veterans and survivors are receiving
PACT Act benefits long overdue. I wasn't here for your
testimony, I apologize. But I know your testimony rightly
highlighted that some veterans are still waiting to have their
toxic exposure properly recognized. And that is why we included
science-driven framework for establishing new presumptive
conditions.
But my question is to you, Commander. Has the VA included
your input, your input, when determining what exposures to put
through the new presumptive process, such as the new report on
Camp Lejeune?
Mr. Seehafer. Again, first and foremost, I do want to say
thank you again for making me feel comfortable, put it that
way. Not only at your office, but the phone call, and even here
today.
Chairman Tester. You bet.
Mr. Seehafer. Since I have been traveling a lot, just to
answer that question, I am going to ask our director, Tiffany
Ellet, because she is boots on the ground on this one.
Chairman Tester. All right. Tiffany.
Mr. Seehafer. Tiffany?
Ms. Ellet. Thank you, Commander. It is good to see you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you for the question.
We work with the VA very closely. They do ask us to be a
part of working groups, roundtables, open sessions, closed
sessions. So I have a very good working relationship with VBA
and VHA, so they do ask us for input, and it feels like they
are really receiving it. So as far as I know, we are working
pretty well together.
Chairman Tester. That is good news, because they are
working for you, so they should be listening to you.

Look, a common theme at VSO hearings is the need to crack
down on predatory claim consultants. This question is for you,
Commander, whoever you want to relay it to. Does the American
Legion support our efforts to reinstate criminal penalties for
violating existing law through S. 740, which is also called the
GUARD Act?
Mr. Seehafer. Chairman, again, thank you for that question
and, again, your passion on this.
Without a doubt, we support that legislation. And again, it
pains me to know that there are predators out there. In fact, I
am going to give you a real live situation, because some people
don't think this exists.
I had a Legionnaire that was severely injured, and a
predator sought him out, gave him his card, and he says, no, I
am okay. He wanted to push his services on him, and he says, I
am okay. I have the American Legion. Do you know what his
response was? Oh, you are going that way.
Chairman Tester. Yes.
Mr. Seehafer. That is sick to me. That is sick, because
what we do is we have our service officers. That is the true
ally, the true friend, that I want standing not only by the
veteran, but also supporting the family. That is who we are.
And you know something? What we charge? That is right. I
always like to say it is F-r-double E, period.
Chairman Tester. Thank you, Commander. I appreciate you. I
appreciate the American Legion. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Bost. Thank you. Ranking Member Takano, you are
recognized.
Mr. Takano. So you all say, don't free the sharks. You know
that phrase?
Chairman Bost. Yes, we know that phrase. Yes.
Mr. Takano. Don't free the sharks. Don't feed the sharks.
So, Commander Seehafer, in reading the sections of your
testimony on the Transition Assistance Program, I definitely
agree that these services need to be held accountable for
getting services to TAP on time. So I proposed moving primary
jurisdiction in Congress for TAP from the Armed Services
Committees to the Veterans' Affairs Committee so that we can
better hold the services accountable. What would you think
about that? Would you all think about supporting that move to
ensure greater oversight over the TAP program?
Mr. Seehafer. Congressman Takano, again, thank you for your
dedication to veterans as well as the family. I do want to ask
our executive director to respond.
Mr. Nuntavong. Thank you. Thank you, Commander.
Ranking Member Takano, we love this Committee. We trust
this Committee. We would support that effort.

Mr. Takano. Well, thank you. I have been talking to the
Chairman about that, and, you know, I think trying to get the
two Committees together has been a problem and a challenge. But
I think, you know, I don't want to ding our folks over on the
Armed Services side, but I just think we pay more attention,
and it is a matter of attention. And so I thank you for the
Legion's response to that.
Continuing on our talk about transition, I agree that a
more customized experience tailored to the individual
servicemember is needed. And I have been working on a bill with
Representative McClellan to require a specific TAP track for
National Guard and Reserve servicemembers. And I see that the
transition between duty statuses for Guard and Reservists as
being different than the transition from active duty to
civilian life. Is that in line with what you would like to see
improved in TAP?
Mr. Seehafer. Congressman, again, without a doubt, that is
what we would like to see and definitely support it. We have a
team here that would like to talk to you, whether it is you
personally or your staff, so we can hammer this out.
Mr. Takano. I would welcome that opportunity. And can you
also speak for your support of, the Legion's support for Mr.
Levin's recently introduced Guard and Reserve GI Bill Parity
Act?
Mr. Seehafer. Absolutely, Congressman.
With the parity, I mean, this is near and dear also to our
hearts. When we are looking at the Guard and Reservists
compared to the active duty, they are serving. They did this.
In fact, through the research that we were doing, when 9/11
happened in New York, who were the first ones there? We know.
It is Guard and Reservists. And so out of all the benefits as
well, we have this gap in the education aspect.
And talking about what I said before with saving lives and
changing lives, we talk about prevention. Education. I don't
understand why that isn't a part of it as well. And when we say
that this leads to gainful employment, education; not being
dependent, but rather independence. That is what we want. That
is what we want for our veterans.
Mr. Takano. Well, thank you, Commander. I couldn't agree
more.
And I yield back.
Chairman Bost. Senator King, you are recognized for 3
minutes.
HON. ANGUS S. KING, JR.
U.S. SENATOR FROM MAINE
Senator King. Thank you very much.
Commander, you are causing me to break a lifetime rule,
which is never follow a preacher to the podium. 
Your opening statement was fantastic, and I want to thank you
for that.
I bring greetings from my wife, who is from Wisconsin. In
my home in Maine, there is a big cheese head in the closet I
just left there.

Mr. Seehafer. All right.
Senator King. In listening to your testimony, I think we
can summarize a lot of what we are trying to do here is by
making two phrases obsolete. When people hear them years from
now, they are going to say, what are you talking about? Those
two phrases are ``veteran suicide'' and ``veterans
homelessness''. That ought to be stricken.

Now, one of the issues in Maine with veteran suicide, 60
percent of our veteran suicide are with firearms. It occurs to
me that American Legion posts are safe spaces for veterans.
Would you consider working with our posts across the country to
provide storage, safe storage for firearms for veterans in our
communities?
Mr. Seehafer. Senator King, again, thank you also for
taking time out of your schedule, not only being here, but
embracing me when I came to visit you and we talked about this
very issue. And we want to, we would love to be able to partner
with anyone, especially you, on this.
And we do think--I mean, a lot of people don't realize how
many posts we have in our Nation.
Senator King. Every community.
Mr. Seehafer. Twelve thousand and basically, like you said,
every community. And, in fact, I want to give you a real live
example of this. This will work. And I don't want to demonize
any others because I brought this same concept up. But I need
to be honest with you, I had eyebrows go kind of like this. It
is like we are a resource.
Senator King. Of course. A trusted resource.
Mr. Seehafer. Yes, absolutely. And what happened in this
situation, it was two Legionnaires. One Legionnaire was not
safe. And here is the example of it. He did call somebody who
he trusted, another Legionnaire, and asked, is it okay? Take my
weapons. This is exactly what we are talking about.
Senator King. I want to also reference the ranking member's
comment about the jurisdiction between Armed Services and
Veterans' Affairs. I am also on Armed Services. You have an
agent on the Armed Services Committee, I can tell you that
right now. I will be there for you in that Committee. And in
fact, one of my first hearings on Armed Services 10 or 12 years
ago, the point I made was, as I was listening to transition and
recruiting and everything, we should spend, the Pentagon should
spend as much time, money, and effort on transition out as they
do on recruiting in.

I am out of time. I appreciate it, Commander, for your
incredibly effective advocacy. The final point is, let us know
where we can help. We can't fix problems we don't know about.
Be in touch, and it doesn't have to be in a big room with
microphones. Let us know what we can do to support these brave
men and women across this country. Thank you so much for your
testimony.
Mr. Seehafer. Thank you.
Chairman Bost. Representative Pappas.
HON. CHRIS PAPPAS,
U.S. REPRESENTATIVE FROM NEW HAMPSHIRE
Mr. Pappas. Thank you very much, Chairman Bost.
Commander, thanks for your passionate testimony here today.
And I really appreciated the way you highlighted the unity of
purpose that we need when we approach these issues. Your agenda
must be Congress' agenda when it comes to delivering for our
veterans.
And I thank all the Legionnaires and veterans who are here
in this room. We want to continue to honor your service and
work together to get the job done.
Whether it is retirement pay or disability compensation,
our veterans deserve all the benefits that they have earned,
full stop. This is an issue I have heard about from veterans in
my district in New Hampshire for years. I have got a
constituent in Auburn, for instance, who joined the Army, was
deployed to Iraq. He was shot twice during a counterinsurgency
operation, was placed in a medically induced coma, took him
years to fully recover. He was awarded two Purple Hearts, two
Bronze Stars with valor for his service. And upon leaving the
Army, he was granted DoD retirement benefits and later VA
disability compensation.
It is one of the reasons why I am supporting the Major
Richard Star Act, and I think we have got to get this across
the finish line. This legislation would finally allow combat-
injured veterans with less than 20 years of military service to
collect both military retired pay and disability compensation
that they earned. They earned these benefits in full.
So, despite overwhelming support in the Congress, this bill
has yet to make it through and be signed into law. And I am
wondering if you can share some of the consequences to your
members of being unable to collect their full benefits and what
Congress must do to get this legislation done.
Mr. Seehafer. Congressman, again, thank you for your
passion as well and all the work that you do for our veterans
and their families.
You know, basically, what can be done or what you can do to
get this done? Pass it. That is the number one. However, with
that, the importance of that, you know, we look at it and we
have been classifying it around our circles as a tax, a
veteran's tax. I mean to say that here you have a retiree
putting 20 or 30 or whatever the years are, right. They earn
that. And is it their fault that somehow they get disabled and
now they are penalized? I think that is wrong. Not I think. It
is wrong.
And so when we talk about changing a life, passage of that
bill, that legislation would definitely change a life.
Mr. Pappas. Well, thank you very much for looking out for
your members and for so many veterans that I hear from on that
issue. And I will continue to work with you all to make sure
Congress feels the urgency there. It is about time we have got
it done, and it is about basic fairness. These benefits have
been earned. They have been paid for through veteran service,
and we have got to reflect that in law. So appreciate your
testimony.
I yield back. Mr. Chair.
Chairman Bost. Senator Blumenthal, you are recognized for 3
minutes.
HON. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL,
U.S. SENATOR FROM CONNECTICUT
Senator Blumenthal. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to thank all of you for being here today as a
proud member of the American Legion from Connecticut. I am sure
we have some folks from Connecticut here today .
Thank you for making the trip.
I am really very, very proud of your advocacy, which has
been so important on veterans causes, most especially on the
PACT Act, which I was helpful in leading, and the Camp Lejeune
Justice Act. Millions of Americans now are eligible, especially
under the expanded coverage for everyone, regardless of where
they served and what time, whether it was in the United States
or abroad, whether it was in training or elsewhere, toxic
exposures, people need to be aware and informed. And your
outreach is going to be so important, not only in passing the
act, but now in creating awareness about it so people can get
screened and take advantage of it. So thank you for what you
have done and what you will do.
And as you know, the initial claims process can be done
free of charge. And many of our fellow members of the American
Legion have filed claims. The help that you provide, obviously
is done without any expectation of compensation or reward. A
number of individuals who do provide that kind of access are
accredited by the VA. And VSOs, like the Legion, have a
congressional charter to carry out their work. But,
unfortunately, there are also others who are trying to take
advantage of veterans in this claims process, and there are
claim sharks, as they are called, who take enormous commissions
from veterans for their service that should be entirely free
and is free when it is provided by you.
So I introduced the GUARD VA Benefits Act in this Congress
with Senator Boozman, Chairman Tester, Senator Graham. It is
bipartisan. Essentially it cracks down on these scam artists
and it is designed to ensure that penalties can be levied
against them. The VFW, the DAV, and dozens of other veterans
organizations support the GUARD Act, 44 attorneys general from
across the country have expressed their support for a bill in a
letter to Congress this year. And I respectfully ask that the
American Legion support it as well. I think you have in past
years. I am not sure whether you do now, but if you could
consider supporting it, I think it would be most beneficial to
veterans.
And I want to join in thanking you for all the work you
have done on veteran suicide, on homelessness. There is no
excuse for a veteran to be homeless. There is no excuse for
suicide to be an issue in the United States of America. And I
hope that you will support the GUARD Act to enable veterans to
have access to these benefits without having to pay commissions
to unaccredited claim sharks. Thank you.
Mr. Seehafer. Senator, just real quick, I am going to tell
you right now, absolutely, we support it. Right family?

Senator Blumenthal. Thank you very much, sir. Really
appreciate it.
Mr. Seehafer. No problem.
Senator Blumenthal. Thank you.
Chairman Bost. Representative Crane.
HON. ELIJAH CRANE,
U.S. REPRESENTATIVE FROM ARIZONA
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Chairman. I appreciate the
opportunity to be here.
I appreciate all you guys showing up today. I feel a little
naked without one of those cool hats. I am a veteran myself. I
am a Navy guy. Joined the Navy the week after 9/11, served in
the SEAL teams for a little bit. So when I look out there, I
see a lot of my brothers and sisters.

I am not--there is obviously, guys, a lot of partisanship
up here in Capitol Hill. You guys know that. One of the cool
things, though, about being up here is there is not a lot of
partisanship when it comes to us veterans. This is something
that Democrats and Republicans get on board to support, and I
am proud of that and I hope it continues. But I do want to talk
to my brothers and sisters out there about something really
important that keeps me up at night.
Guys, you guys know where we are at with our national debt,
$34 trillion-plus and counting. I want to talk to you guys
seriously, because you guys don't get--there is not a lot of
people that have serious conversations with you guys. What do
you guys think the magic number is where this house of cards
finally collapses? Do you think it is 35 trillion? Do you think
it is 40 trillion? Do you think it is 50 trillion?
Do you think it is when the BRICS countries, Brazil,
Russia, India, China, South Africa, Saudi Arabia, et cetera,
finally form their alternative currency? Why do I say that,
guys? When this house of cards collapses financially, and that
is the trajectory that we are on, no country in the history of
the world has been able to do what we are doing, what do you
think are our benefits? Because I get them, too. What do you
think our benefits are going to look like then?
And the reason I bring that up, guys, is because there is
not many people up here that talk about it, think about it.
They don't talk to you about it. And I want us collectively to
start thinking about that, because we are servicemen and women.
We love this country. We fought for it. And that fight isn't
over. There is an economic fight going on right now up here to
try and sustain not only our economic prowess, but also the
benefits that we have.
So I wanted to bring that up to you guys, and I hope that
you go back and you start talking about it in your communities
and with your representatives. Because, guys, this trajectory
is not sustainable. I hate to be the guy that dampens the mood
in here, but we need to have some serious conversations,
because every meeting that I walk into or every meeting that I
host in my office, it is another group usually, that represents
a good cause, and guess what they need. More resources, more
money. And what we are doing is not sustainable.
So I hope you guys take that back. God bless you all. Thank
you for your service, and I appreciate the opportunity to come
here and address you. Thank you.

Chairman Bost. Senator Hassan.
HON. MARGARET WOOD HASSAN,
U.S. SENATOR FROM NEW HAMPSHIRE
Senator Hassan. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
And Commander Seehafer, thank you so much for testifying
here today as well as for your military service. I want to
acknowledge former state commander and now current National
Vice Commander Bill Roy from New Hampshire. Thank you for being
here, sir. Thank you for your service . We are very
proud of all of our Granite State veterans.
And I will just say that as I listened to your testimony, I
was thinking my father, who was a World War II veteran, who
survived the Bulge and often said to me, we don't always like
each other as Americans, but we do have to love each other as
Americans, and that is what you learn in this service. And so I
thank you for reminding us of that unity of purpose that is so
important.
Commander, I want to start with a question. It is really
about the PACT Act. I know you have mentioned it. I know people
here know about it. But last week, the VA announced new PACT
Act healthcare eligibility for millions of veterans ahead of
schedule. Now veterans who were exposed to toxins can go to the
VA and enroll in healthcare, and they don't need to apply for
VA benefits first. So I was really proud to help develop and
pass the PACT Act with Members of this wonderful Committee on
both sides of the Capitol. And I want to make sure that our
veterans know about the care they are able to get under it.
So I am speaking out to New Hampshire veterans in
particular today. I want to encourage any veteran who may have
been exposed to toxins to contact the VA to see if you are now
eligible to enroll in healthcare.
Commander, can you just discuss how important it is that
eligible veterans go to the VA, enroll, and get the care and
support that they have earned and they deserve?
Mr. Seehafer. Thank you, Senator, for that question. And
again, your passion and your tireless effort on this act. And
also, Bill is a pretty good guy.
Senator Hassan. Yes.
Mr. Seehafer. But seriously on that, dealing with the VA,
it is a great resource for us. This is the center of care, not
just adequate care, but the best. And I just want to tell the
brothers and sisters up here and really the whole family or
whoever is listening, so far, I have went to 28 States in four
countries, literally went around the world already. And I have
been to VAs, veterans homes everywhere. But every time people
have come to me, these are your constituents, they have said
the care is top notch. I know there is little issues, and
again, we will address them, but the care is top notch.
And you have such an ally right here. I mean, we are a
nearly 3 million, 3 million family members here. That is a
great resource. And we will continue to get the word out, this
is the place to go.
Senator Hassan. Thank you. And thank you, Mr. Chair, for
letting me take this turn.
And also just thanks to the Legion for your work on the
Buddy Check Week, and we are going to continue to work with you
on that. Thank you.
Mr. Seehafer. Thank you.
Chairman Bost. Thank you, Senator.
And now Representative Self.
HON. KEITH SELF,
U.S. REPRESENTATIVE FROM TEXAS
Mr. Self. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is good to see so many fellow veterans in the audience
today. Thank you for your service, both during uniform and
after. It is always an honor to sit next to my Navy SEAL
brothers here. I am a Army Beret, and something has concerned
me. If you have been following our markups in this Committee,
you know that I am concerned about the only offset that this
Committee has to use. We need your help on this because we have
an offset that relies on extending the VA home loan fee that
veterans pay. So, in effect, our offset is charging our
veterans more for every program that we add. Every spending
bill that we add, it charges our veterans. So veterans are
paying for new veterans programs. It technically generates
revenue that is supposedly offset, but it is not an offset. We
don't cut a less noble program for the noble programs we have.
So, once again, I say veterans are paying for every new
spending bill that this Committee authorizes and gets
appropriated. How does, and, Commander, for you, how does the
American Legion reconcile its support for this so-called offset
with its mission to advocate for the well-being of all veterans
to include those that are paying the additional home loan fee?
Mr. Seehafer. Congressman, thank you for that thoughtful
question. To answer that specifically, I want to call on our
executive director.
Mr. Nuntavong. Thank you, Commander. And thank you for that
question, Congressman.
We have a resolution. We are a resolution-based
organization that we don't support any offsets. But what we
would like to do is work with the Committee and staff and find
out other ways and other means of finding funding for all these
programs and services. We got to work together to figure this
out because our veterans are in need. And the only way to do
that is to provide adequate funding there.
Mr. Self. So, did you listen to my colleague here, Mr.
Crane? Okay. So you are not in support of any alternative
offsets whatsoever? And it doesn't have to be in the VA. So
don't think that a VA offset must come from VA. I would like to
work with you to find offsets anywhere in the budget because I
am not saying we need to have VA offsets, but I think we need
to work together, to use your term, to find a better way to
offset, because veterans' care is important to the entire
Nation. So, I am not suggesting it must come out of the VA
budget. Don't misunderstand me. But I think we need to start to
find a way so that our veterans don't pay for every new
veterans spending bill.
Thank you. And I yield back, Chairman.
Chairman Bost. Thank you. Representative Ramirez?
HON. DELIA C. RAMIREZ,
U.S. REPRESENTATIVE FROM ILLINOIS
Mrs. Ramirez. Thank you, Chairman.
I also want to start today by acknowledging the tremendous
work and the significant contributions that Veterans Service
Organizations have made and continue to make every single day.
I don't think you hear it enough. I want to say thank you.
I also want to give a special thank you to the veterans
that are representing Illinois and the American Legion. So a
big round of applause for the Illinois folks here .
Thank you for your service. I know the Chairman agrees with me,
and for your commitment to the betterment and the lives of
every single veteran here.
Folks, I want to shed a light on an issue that we don't
really talk about here, but that is very close to my heart,
particularly as we are talking about our veterans and the
challenges as they are transitioning back into civilian life.
My heart has been really struggling and thinking about the
challenges to legal pathways to veterans who are threatened to
be deported. I mean, think about it. After serving their
country, giving their--willing to risk their life, to me it is
unimaginable that they are still at risk of deportation, that
they are still at risk of being separated from their own family
as a veteran. So, Commander, I want to make sure I got it
right, Seehafer?
Mr. Seehafer. That is correct.
Mrs. Ramirez. Yes, yes. I want to ask you, what do you
think is a solution to prevent veterans who have served our
country from possible deportation?
Mr. Seehafer. Congresswoman, again, thank you for all the
advocacy that you do, and again, the passion. It troubles a lot
of us as well, those that have served our country. Just for,
again, a little more boots on the ground dealing with this, I
am going to ask my executive director to respond. Okay?
Mrs. Ramirez. Thank you.
Mr. Nuntavong. Thank you, Commander. Thank you,
Congresswoman.
We see this all the time. Veterans aren't educated about
their citizen benefits when they join. They are not aware that
they can apply for expedited citizenship. I think we need to
take every opportunity to educate servicemembers about their
responsibility to apply for the paperwork that needs to be done
to help expedite, provide education, and make it part of the
culture of joining, enlisting, being part of an organization to
serve and honor the United States of America. We have to do a
better job of helping those. Most of them don't know that that
opportunity is there.
Mrs. Ramirez. Yes. And I hear from some of my constituents
and wives who say, my husband is now in Mexico. He was a green
card holder. His life is the United States. He feels American,
and the challenges of even getting those benefits. So I would
like to talk to you offline a little bit about the procedural
process there and the challenges to that pathway. So thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman Bost. Representative Landsman.
HON. GREG LANDSMAN,
U.S. REPRESENTATIVE FROM OHIO
Mr. Landsman. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you all for
being here and for your incredible service to the country.
To my friends from Ohio, anyone out there? 
There we go. Thank you. Welcome and thank you for your service.
I want to talk about employment and jobs and the work that
you all and the VA and others, your partners do. Part of this
just has to do with making sure that every single veteran has
access to, you know, good jobs. But another piece of this is
the benefit that our VA and VA partners provide in terms of
employment services and how that helps to get folks into the VA
world and network.
Commander, you talked a little bit about this in your
testimony, and we have a piece of legislation that you all have
supported. This is Employing Veterans to Feed America Act,
which would direct the Secretary of Agriculture to create a
pilot program on hiring veterans into positions related to
agriculture, conservation, and nutrition. I think we will get
it marked up and passed. My hope is that it will help to, you
know, create another pathway for veterans in terms of good
paying jobs. I was hoping that you all may talk about that and
the bill, but also just a larger issue.
Mr. Seehafer. Again, thank you, Congressman, for that.
You know, veterans' education and employment is very
important and I would be remiss if I wouldn't ask my chairman,
Jay Bowen, to direct that since he is patiently waiting here to
speak. This is very important to us as well. This is where we
talk about, you know, even prevention of what I was talking
about.
Mr. Landsman. Yes, right.
Mr. Seehafer. But Jay.
Mr. Bowen. Thank you, Commander. And thank you,
Congressman, for the question.
Absolutely, we believe in this. You know, veterans,
especially when they are on active duty, a lot of them are
outdoorsmen and some of that is what drove them to go into the
military.
Mr. Landsman. Right.
Mr. Bowen. So it is just a natural progression, a migration
for them once they get out to seek those types of careers. So
we certainly support that and would advocate for that.
Mr. Landsman. Thank you. I appreciate it.
And just in general, other employment programs that you all
would lift up, to me because it is so important in terms of
just helping veterans and their families, but it is also a way
to get them in and it does prevent all kinds of other things.
Just the role of employment and education in general, just the
programs that you all are working on.
Oh, my time is up. I am sorry. I will circle back, but I
thank you all for your service.
Chair, I yield back.
Chairman Bost. And I want to say, if I can, thank you to
the American Legion. Commander, thank you for giving us your
views and the Legion's views here today.
And I also want to say thank you to the audience that
obviously has come from every corner of this great Nation to be
here today to be part of this. Thank you for your testimony and
thank you for what you do every day because we know your
service organization, as large as it is, is reaching out and is
the boots on the ground.
So we are going to excuse the first panel, but I need to
explain something to you because you are a big group. Okay. If
you would use that door so that we put up our second panel, we
can come in this and it causes a smooth transition. Okay.
So thank you again. And we are going to have a brief recess
while we switch. Thank you.
Mr. Seehafer. Thank you, Chairman.


Chairman Bost. Well, we want to welcome our second panel,
and we want to thank you for being here today. I know we have a
lot of important organizations to hear from in this panel, so
let's get right to it.
Today we are joined by Colonel Barry Lischinsky of the
Jewish War Veterans, Ms. Rebecca Harrison Mullaney of the
Tragedy Assisted Program for Survivors, Ms. Kathryn Monet of
National Coalition of Homeless Veterans, Commander Rene Campos
of the Military Officers Association of America, Mr. Michael
McLaughlin of the National Association of County Veterans
Service Officers, Mr. Melvin Sheldon, Jr. of the National
Congress of American Indians, Mr. Jack McManus of the Vietnam
Veterans of America, Major General Frank McGinn of the National
Guard Association of the United States, and Mr. John Handzuk of
the Fleet Reserve Association.
And again, welcome to all of you and all of your members in
the audience as well. We want to thank you for what you do
every day in support of our veterans and their families.
Colonel Lischinsky, you are now recognized for 5 minutes
for your opening statement.
PANEL II
----------
STATEMENT OF COL BARRY LISCHINSKY, USA (RET.),
NATIONAL COMMANDER, JEWISH WAR VETERANS OF THE USA
Mr. Lischinsky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman Tester, Chairman
Bost, Ranking Members of Moran and Takano, Members of the
House, the Senate Committee on Veterans' Affairs, and fellow
veterans and friends and guests. I'm Colonel Barry Lischinsky.
I'm the 92nd National Commander for Jewish War Veterans of the
United States and I'm honored to be here today. My credentials
are as follows.
I'm a career military member, started as an enlisted medic,
combat medic, and cultivated as a brigade commander. My
military service spans for over 34 years, with continued
military service supporting operations and conflicts from the
Vietnam War all the way to the Global War on Terrorism. I
retired from the military and served as a senior Army
instructor at two high schools in a JROTC program. In 2017, I
was appointed by the Governor to be the superintendent of
Chelsea Soldiers Home. The largest soldier's home and one of
the first in our Nation.
And I tell you all this because those are my credentials.
But my real credentials are the members of JWV, our auxiliary,
Museum of National American Jewish Military History, and they
are the credentials of JWV and I am honored to be part of that
organization. In two days, we will have 128th anniversary
serving as the oldest chartered active veteran service
organization in the United States.
As veterans, we all fought to protect our freedom of right,
freedom of religion. As the only Jewish service organization,
JWV opposes in all forms of hatred, discrimination, and
bigotry, but is especially outspoken on antisemitism. JWV
condemns the Hamas territory attack against Israel and
emphasizes the terrorist actions anywhere, whenever it happens.
Just as all veteran service organizations, our members are
all volunteers and we serve the call proudly to serve with all
military veterans, their families, and their survivors. This is
a great honor for us to serve. As a veteran, once again, we
fought to protect our rights and--excuse me. JWV stands with
Israel, its military, its citizens, and call on all Americans
to join us in the condemning anti-terrorism. The remaining
hostages must be immediately released and reconstituted with
their family. JWV is the leading effort and demonstrates
solidarity unity from the larger veteran's community of the
United States.
We secured the signature of 26 veteran service
organizations and military service organizations that represent
millions of current and former uniform service members and
their families to stand with us against anti-terrorism. On
November 3rd, the letter was sent to many of our members for
their statements and JWV asked all Americans to be vigilant, to
learn, educate, and follow JWV, and we ask our veteran services
committee to join us as well. We feel that education is the key
to reduce antisemitism actions and incidents in America and
around the world. Whether it be professional development
classes, ethics classes, compliance classes in the workplace,
or just a fireside chat, JWV will assist any organization
anywhere in that conflict.
We'd like to talk quickly about medical records. Last year
I was privileged to stand before this group and I heard one of
the members say that we're looking for a basic database that is
a good data base to use. I would ask that you use the MEPS,
Military Entrance Processing Station, the first entrance
processing station for any of us joining the military to use
their physical as the baseline for what you need for your
medical records. I have not talked to the MEPS commander, but
that MEPS physical is a professional done physical. It beats
any physical in any civilian world. I would also say that if
you really want to do some work with this, any individual being
released from active duty, that they take a similar physical.
It makes a lot of sense to do the physical on the way in and
the physical on the way out from the same grouping, and you'll
get a standardization for that. So we highly recommend that to
happen.
In a conclusion of this--and I look to see that the clock
is ticking. I want to leave you with one quick thought. Where
can we be, that individuals on this panel can come before a
distinguished group, as your Committee, talk freely, talk
honestly, make recommendations, have you listen, have you
observe, have you ask us questions? Only in the United States
this can happen. And we're very, very proud to come before you
to do this. And we're very proud that you're sitting there
representing all the veterans, all their families, all their
caretakers, and all their survivors. And as part of JWV, we're
honored to be here and we're here to assist all our veterans
and this Committee with anything they do. Thank you very much
for your time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lischinsky appears on page
81 of the Appendix.]
Chairman Bost. Thank you, and we are very proud to
represent you . We really are. I think that goes this
way for what all you do and everybody that is on this panel. So
we would like to also recognize Ms. Rebecca Harrison Mullaney
for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF REBECCA HARRISON MULLANEY, SURVIVING SPOUSE OF
ARMY CAPTAIN IAN MORRISON, TRAGEDY ASSISTANCE PROGRAM FOR
SURVIVORS
Ms. Harrison Mullaney. Thank you, Chairman Tester, Bost,
Ranking Members Moran and Takano, and distinguished Committee
members. I am grateful to be here today representing the
Tragedy Assistance Program for Survivors and for the
opportunity to share my story.
Twelve years ago, at the age of 24, my heart was full of
ambition and hope for the future. I'd married an incredible
man, Ian Morrison, an Apache pilot in the U.S. Army. His call
sign, Captain America, spoke to his character. He served
honorably and always did the right thing. He was kind and
caring, artistic, and sarcastic. He was smart, majoring in
systems engineering at West Point. He was a man of faith, and
he loved me. We were happy and building a life that truly felt
like a gift.
At 24, I was teaching on post at Fort Hood and pursuing a
graduate degree in clinical counseling. Ian had come back to me
safely after 10 months in Iraq but he couldn't sleep. We tried
everything. He sought help six separate times through the
proper military channels. The only assistance he received was a
prescription for Ambien, a black box morning sleep aid. The
morning of March 21, 2012, after his third night on Ambien, was
a seemingly normal one. He came to my classroom, where he read
to my students, something he did often. We had lunch together,
and I gave him a big hug, never knowing it would be our last.
Ian died that night. I found him in our bedroom, clothed in
his Army fatigues, having taken his own beautiful life. He'd
died by suicide at the age of 26 and taken all our plans for
the future with him. I will never recover from what I saw that
night. My husband, Captain Ian Samuel Morrison, did not want to
die. He wanted to live. Like so many of his brothers and
sisters in arms, he came home from Iraq in need of help that he
did not receive. He died at home from the mental wounds of war
and not in a war zone. Therefore, I was not recognized as a
Gold Star Spouse.
I am in strong support of the TAPS recommendation to
legally create a broad and inclusive definition of what
constitutes a Gold Star family. Specifically, that definition
needs to be died while serving or from a service-connected
injury or illness. My own clinical work with surviving families
over the past 10 years tells me that only good can come from
equally honoring and recognizing the families of all veterans
and service members who died as a result of their service,
regardless of how they died or the geographical location.
I grieved Ian intensely. The man I'd lost and the future
with him that would never be. I eventually found healing and
advocating for service members, veterans, and their families,
and following through with my goal to become a mental health
care provider. I chose to become what Ian needed before his
death and what I so desperately needed after his death.
Years later along this path, I met Brennan, an Army veteran
himself. We shared a passion for supporting the military and
veteran community. Being with Brennan brought light back into
my life. Through my stories, he got to know Ian, and for the
first time since my loss, I let myself feel vulnerable and find
love again. After experiencing the sanctity and joy of marriage
with Ian, I knew that this was something I didn't want to live
the rest of my life without. Which is why Brennan and I chose
to legally marry. In choosing to remarry, I surrendered all
that I had left of Ian on paper and the benefits he had earned.
Sixteen hundred per month in dependency and indemnity
compensation, a portion of his retirement, health insurance,
education benefits, military spouse hiring preference, the
ability to use the VA home loan, and base access. I am grateful
that base access and commissary and exchange privileges have
since been restored.
The irony is that the only thing that I didn't lose is that
I am and will forever be Ian's widow. Remarrying did not change
that. If Brennan and I had waited until I was 55 to marry, as
the law currently states to retain benefits, I would still be
Ian's widow. But I would have delayed the life I have now. A
beautiful second chance at happiness with a man who respected
Ian and my loss so much that he sat at Ian's grave and asked
his permission to marry me before proposing. Brennan and I have
a young son, Harrison Samuel, named in honor of our hero, Ian
Samuel. He will always be a part of our lives. No passage of
time and no magical age of 55 could change that. People are not
replaceable.
I personally want to thank Ranking Member Moran for
introducing the Love Lives On Act, and I ask that Congress pass
this critical legislation to keep our Nation's solemn promise
to care for our Gold Star Spouses. Taking away a surviving
spouse's benefits upon remarriage will never change the fact
that they will always be the widow or widower of someone who
honorably served our country and died due to that service.
In closing, we ask for your support strengthening DIC by
passing the Caring for Survivors Act and ensuring CHAMPVA
healthcare for young adult survivors until age 26.
The moral of my story is that the heart has many chambers.
In one of mine, I hold my love for Ian, and in another, my love
for Brennan. I believe you will find this to be true for every
survivor. Thank you for letting me share my boys with you
today. I welcome your questions.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Harrison Mullaney appears on
page 100 of the Appendix.]
Chairman Bost. Thank you. Now we would now like to
recognize Ms. Kathryn Monet for 5 minutes for your opening
statement.
STATEMENT OF KATHRYN MONET, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, NATIONAL
COALITION FOR HOMELESS VETERANS
Ms. Monet. Chairman Tester and Bost, Ranking Members Moran
and Takano, and the Committee on Veterans' Affairs, thank you
for the opportunity to join you today. NCHV appreciates your
bipartisan leadership and continuing efforts to focus on the
needs of veterans experiencing or at risk of homelessness.
There are many proposals that we support to enhance our
ability to address veteran homelessness, but I will focus on
NCHV's top priorities today. Priority number one is restoration
of the pandemic era safety net. HUD recently released Point-in-
Time Count data from January 2023, finding an increase of 7.4
percent in homeless veterans on any night. We all knew VA's
emergency programs nationwide, emergency rent assistance
programs, and eviction and foreclosure moratorium, would
sunset. We learned these resources were critical to
homelessness prevention and housing more veterans than in
previous years. Yet a continually worsening housing
affordability crisis offset recent accelerations in housing
placements as and after these programs' sunset.
For several years, legislation that could have addressed
the statutes limiting these VA authorities and offered
additional resources to veterans facing housing instability has
stalled unnecessarily before Congress. The best time to act
upon legislation would have been before the public health
emergency expired on May 11, 2023, but we're here today. So the
second best time to act upon this legislation is now.
Delayed action here has resulted in veterans losing access
to communication, transportation, safety, and survival
necessities. The loss of hotel and motel rapid rehousing
capacity, that gave providers time to place a veteran in more
permanent housing without delays associated with locating them.
And a 60 percent reduction in the per diem rate that providers
can request from VA, leading some providers to seize serving
veterans and other challenges. A handful of bills, including
the Senator Elizabeth Dole 21st Century Veterans Healthcare and
Benefits Improvement Act, would all provide VA and
organizations nationwide with the funding and flexibility to
provide adequate services to unhoused veterans. We urge you to
enact this bill with the level of urgency that you would expect
if you were unsheltered tonight looking for assistance.
Priority two is VA Medical Center staffing. NCHV is
concerned about reports of unfilled positions related to
homelessness at VA Medical Centers at a time when veteran
homelessness is on the rise and communities are increasing
efforts to criminalize homelessness. While Secretary McDonough
has stated that recent hiring prioritization efforts should not
be cause for concern, we have heard for over a month now, that
VACO's prioritization initiatives continue to result in VAMC
director's choosing to leave critical vacancies related to
homeless operations unfilled, even those funded via special
purpose dollars.
We've heard from providers across the country that veterans
are unable to access HUD-VASH in a timely way, if at all. From
month long waits for intakes, to hiring pauses that delay
program enrollment, to the need for other community providers
to support veterans in HUD-VASH when their local VA Medical
Center is unstaffed. That's not acceptable. We urge Congress to
continue its oversight of these programs and VA staffing
initiatives to ensure that specific guidance exempting special
purpose staffing from hiring pauses can be issued expeditiously
to VA Medical Centers.
Priority three is to increase HUD-VASH utilization. NCHV
continues to support efforts to maximize the use of HUD-VASH
vouchers, including by project basing, issuing grants, and/or
contracts for case management, and appropriating sufficient
funding for navigation services and incentives for landlords
and PHAs. We support legislation that would address eligibility
discrepancies, including the regulatory definition of income
used by HUD and Treasury. This definition includes disability
compensation, meaning that some homeless veterans with the most
acute service-connected disability ratings are ineligible for
HUD-VASH and/or to reside in affordable housing developed with
LIHTC funds. We urge you to make mandatory tribal HUD-VASH
appropriations on behalf of our collective commitment to
targeted universalism across our system, and we also support
efforts to provide much needed upstream homelessness prevention
tools, as requested in the most recent Presidential budget
request.
Our fourth priority is aging veterans. A growing population
of aging veterans experiencing homelessness has challenged us
to improve services and access. We recommend authorizing HUD-
VASH with grant-making capacity to simplify our ability to
offer enhanced and coordinated services and supports to elderly
veterans utilizing vouchers. Their needs are much more complex
than the average veteran and allowing grant-making capacity
would enhance communities' ability to provide those services.
We also urge congressional support for an enactment of
legislation promoting the development of new subsidized housing
specifically for low and no-income aging and disabled veterans,
as well as prioritizing the adaptation of existing spaces
across the housing continuum.
Lastly, we recommend that Congress allocate funding for
staff liaison positions to coordinate efforts to serve aging
veterans across all HPO programs. Our written testimony has a
full list of authorizing and appropriations priorities that I'm
happy to discuss further with you and/or your staff. Thank you
for the opportunity to partner with you on our shared priority
of ending veteran homelessness.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Monet appears on page 135 of
the Appendix.]
Chairman Bost. Thank you. I would now like to recognize
Commander Campos for 5 minutes for your opening statement.
STATEMENT OF CDR RENE CAMPOS, USN (RET.), SENIOR DIRECTOR OF
GOVERNMENT RELATIONS FOR VETERANS WOUNDED WARRIOR CARE,
MILITARY OFFICERS ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA
Ms. Campos. Chairman Bost and Ranking Member Takano, allow
me to start by asking our MOAA representatives in the audience
to rise so we can thank you for this opportunity to share our
legislative priorities for veterans.

So what's the one common theme that brings us together?
We're all committed to preserving and protecting service earned
health care and benefits for those that we serve. MOAA
appreciates the Committees working collectively with VSOs and
MSOs to improve the lives of our veterans. Our top priority is
getting the Senator Elizabeth Dole 21st Century Veterans
Healthcare and Benefits Improvement Act package signed into
law, which has many of our priorities, like caregiving.
VA has made progress in advancing caregiving services, but
today's demand outpaces availability and it's still difficult
for veterans and caregivers to access these services, including
respite care. For example, a Vietnam veteran caregiver in VA's
Caregiver Support Program told us, I was contacted by VA for an
initial phone consult for respite care. I gave some dates for
scheduling, but I received no further communication from VA. As
a former medical administrator, this is frustrating and
deflating personally and to caregivers generally.
MOAA and the Quality of Life Foundation have hosted
roundtables to help Congress, VA, and decision-makers improve
caregiving programs. Last fall, we held a roundtable on Federal
and community respite care options and published a list of
recommendations. We urge Congress to pass the Home and
Community Based Services, Long Term Care, Caregiver Support
Program, bills in our written statement, including the
Elizabeth Dole Home Care Act and the Veteran Caregiver Re-
education, Re-employment, and Retirement Act, and to hold
hearings to consider our respite care roundtable
recommendations.
As a 30-year Navy veteran, I want to personally thank VA
for my health care. My initial experiences with the VA in and
out of service is not always great, but I gave VA another
chance and I hope other women do the same. VA is not perfect,
but I see progress and I know the staff supports me and they
love their job. As such, MOAA continues to advocate to
eliminate healthcare disparities and advance research programs
for women, minority, and underserved veterans. We urge Congress
to establish a joint HVAC and SVAC task force to represent the
interests of women, minority, underserved, and vulnerable
veteran populations and pass the Servicemembers and Veterans
Empowerment and Support Act to help MST survivors.
Today, VHA is a health system in transition undergoing more
than two decades of persistent change and mission expansion.
Health systems like VHA were vital during the pandemic and they
continue to evolve since the crisis. But VA needs predictable
funding to preserve its foundational mission. So we urge
Congress to appropriate funding to stabilize and modernize
VHA's workforce and human and physical infrastructure. We know
the PACT Act has made monumental strides for ill veterans, so
implementation is imperative if we're going to see radical
change.
MOAA and DAV collaborated on a report called ``Ending the
Wait for Toxic-Exposed Veterans,'' which provides an overview
of the challenges in the presumptive process and presents
recommendations for improvement. We found on average, toxic
exposures do not receive presumptive condition status for over
30 years. That's because they were not conceded while in
service. MOAA and DAV urge congressional members and staff to
attend our report briefing in May, invitation is forthcoming,
and implement our report recommendations.
Finally, MOAA recommends Congress establish GI Bill Parity
for Reserve members to ensure every day in uniform counts for
service. We also support the House and the Senate compromised
version. The bill will incentivize active duty members to
continue their service and the reserves.
Thank you for considering our priorities. Let's work
together to get the veterans package and on the DoD side, the
Star Act signed into law. Together, let's send a strong
message, our country cares, and supports our all volunteer
force in and out of uniform, which is one of the most important
ways we can sustain a strong national defense. I look forward
to your questions.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Campos appears on page 148
of the Appendix.]
Chairman Bost. Thank you. Mr. McLaughlin, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF MICHAEL MCLAUGHLIN, LEGISLATIVE DIRECTOR, NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION OF COUNTY VETERANS SERVICE OFFICERS
Mr. McLaughlin. Chairman Bost, Chairman Tester, Ranking
Member Takano, and Ranking Member Moran, and distinguished
Members of the Committees, on behalf of the National
Association of County Veteran Service Officers, commonly
referred to as NACVSO, I extend our gratitude for the
opportunity to address this joint session. My name is Michael
McLaughlin and I serve as a legislative director for NACVSO.
Our organization is a unique one in that all of our
appointed leaders or elected leaders, as well as the majority
of our membership, currently serve as VA accredited
representatives working in the field, assisting veterans and
their dependents, daily. It is my honor to share with you the
issues that are important to our organization. Issues such as
Federal support for coordination with local government VSOs.
Last year, I testified before this joint session on this
critical issue of Federal support and coordination with
Governmental Veteran Service Officers, or GVSOs. Since that
testimony, little action has changed or been put into play
supporting frontline GVSOs working at the State, county,
tribal, and municipal levels. Unfortunately, there has been
just about as much discussion on expanding paid services for
veterans, as there has been neglecting the essential
partnerships between GVSOs, traditional veteran service
organizations, and the Federal Government. Just as we would
never expect our active duty military members to have to
purchase their own ammunition to wage their fight, veterans
should never be expected to purchase their own access to their
own earned VA benefits.
GVSOs serve as frontline advocates in their communities,
offering support that extends beyond disability claims. While
we handle a significant workload of disability claims, our
duties encompass a wide range of services.
Despite the invaluable role that GVSOs play supporting
veterans and their families, there appears to remain
misunderstandings regarding the scope of our responsibilities.
Disability claims are just one aspect of the work we do. We
also provide essential services to veterans that veterans need
to thrive beyond their military service. We help coordinate
their VA healthcare, whether that's at the VA or in the
community. When they get a billing issue that arises from that
care, we help them resolve it. When a veteran needs to access
emergency care services in their community, they call their
GVSO to ensure that VA is notified in a timely manner. When a
veteran is placed in hospice in a local healthcare facility,
the social workers call their local GVSO to help with
enrollment at their bedside. When a veteran needs a two hour
ride to a medical appointment, they call our offices. When a
homeless veteran is identified after hours by local law
enforcement or sheriff deputies, it is our offices they call to
help secure a hotel when no shelters exist in rural United
States. We are the ones whom the veterans attend school,
church, and see at the grocery store. It is the GVSOs that get
the call on their personal cell to be notified of yet another
veteran in their community who lost their struggle with PTSD.
Disability claims are what we do, and we are good at them,
but it doesn't stop there. GVSOs are not incentivized by
profiting from a veteran's disability claim or their injury in
military service. Instead, we are incentivized by improving the
lives of those we live with and those that we serve in our
local communities.
In recent years, historic legislation has expanded benefits
and care for veterans with little consideration being given to
the resources needed to provide access to those benefits.
Initiatives such as the Veterans Appeals Modernization Act, the
MISSION Act, the Blue Water Navy Vietnam Veterans Act, and the
PACT Act have placed additional demands on GVSOs and VSOs
without adequate local support. The COVID-19 pandemic also
further highlighted the need for robust local assistance. We
encourage and we commend the efforts by this Congress to
support and collaborate with GVSOs. Efforts like Representative
Levin's Commitment to Veteran Support and Outreach Act, which
aims to make Federal grants available to GVSOs for the first
time ever and would funnel resources to areas of the country
with critical shortages of GVSOs, high rates of veteran
suicide, and high rates of veterans crisis line referrals.
We further applaud efforts like Representative Luttrell's
Veteran Benefits Improvement Act, which aims to strengthen
upstream communication and review support between VA and GVSOs.
Similarly, Representative Van Orden's TAP Promotion Act
represents positive steps toward enhancing upstream cooperation
between the Federal Government and GVSOs and VSOs during
military transitions.
Governmental Veteran Service Officers are a force
multiplier. We should be creating a system where we empower
them to generate efficiency within that system.
To use a metaphor, a forward operating base, or FOB, in a
combat theater should seek to strengthen and support the
fighting positions of the troops holding the line. This
requires communication, sharing of intelligence, and resources
to the local front. If the FOB fails to support the fighting
positions, then the mission fails. Then we fail.
Chairman, Ranking Members, Members of this Committee, on
behalf of NACVSO, thank you for your attention to these
important issues. And I urge this Committee to consider the
critical role GVSOs play in supporting veterans and their
families. By investing in local assistance and fostering
collaboration between the Federal Government and our local
agencies, we can ensure that no veteran is left behind. Thank
you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. McLaughlin appears on page
173 of the Appendix.]
Chairman Bost. Thank you, Mr. McLaughlin. Mr. Sheldon, you
are recognized for 5 minutes for your opening statement.
STATEMENT OF MELVIN SHELDON, JR., ALTERNATE VICE PRESIDENT-
NORTHWEST REGION, NATIONAL CONGRESS OF AMERICAN INDIANS
Mr. Sheldon. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman Bost and to
Ranking Member Takano, thank you for the opportunity to share
with you today, and to all the Members of the House and Senate
Veterans' Committee, thank you. Thank you.
My name is Mel Sheldon. I am a Vietnam veteran. Also, I am
an Agent Orange prostate cancer survivor. So far, so good.
Thank you for the VA for helping me. Also, I've served on
tribal council at Tulalip Tribes, a small little reservation
north of Seattle, about 35 minutes. Just in case you're in the
area, we have a small bed and breakfast there if you wanted to
stay with us. Also, regionally, I serve as ATNI first vice
president. We represent 57 tribes in the Northwest. Currently,
also, I am the alternate delegate vice president for National
Congress of American Indians. So I'm serving at three different
levels and very honored to serve as veterans committee chairman
for our regional committee there. National Congress of American
Indians, as you may be aware, was founded 80 years ago and is
the oldest, largest, and most representative American Indians
and Alaska Natives. And we're so proud of all of those that we
represent, men and women.
Native people have served at a higher rate in the armed
forces than any other group of Americans, and they have served
in all the Nation's wars since the Revolutionary War. Despite
this impressive record of service, oftentimes the lack of
programs, services, and assistance that Native veterans receive
upon returning home from serving is underwhelming and we are
asking you all to help change that. Getting the information out
there, helping them step up to the plate, to take advantage of
what the VA offers.
Today, while my written testimony touches on a number of
subjects, I want to concentrate today on the quality of life
for Native Americans in housing and suicide prevention. While
housing is often thought of as an infrastructure problem
challenge, the reality is it is being underhoused or homeless
is really a health disparity. Despite the service they provide
to our country, homelessness and housing insecurity remains a
major concern for our Native veterans. At least one study found
that Native veterans made up 19 percent of all the homeless
veterans, in that study sample, making Native veterans homeless
rate almost 10 times their representation in the general
public. Another study indicated that Native American veterans
living in poverty were twice as likely to be homeless, more
than any other non-veteran Native American.
In the area of housing, the most important action that can
be taken for Native American veterans is to reauthorize and
make permanent the Native American Housing Assistance and Self
Determination Act. Many of us know that by NAHASDA. NAHASDA has
done a great job for us and has been successfully used by the
tribes across the country, which then helps us focus on housing
needs in our own communities. At Tulalip, we're almost 300
houses behind, so the need is there not only for our members,
but our veterans as well.
But however, NAHASDA expired 10 years ago. Reauthorizing
NAHASDA will help Native American veterans struggling with
homelessness by improving the HUD Veterans Affairs Supportive
Housing. HUD, that's V-A-S-H Program. Recognizing this critical
need, earlier this year, the Senate, with strong bipartisan
support, voted in favor of reauthorizing the NAHASDA. That vote
in favor of reauthorization included support for veteran--
support for 17 of the 19 members from the Senate Committee on
Veterans' Affairs. So stepping up to the plate, and the House,
I'm sure, is stepping up to the plate as well.
Before I close, I do want to turn also to the issue of
suicide among Native veterans. I myself, through the years have
experienced two of my close friends that decided to leave early
and it hurt. It was devastating. The reality is American
veterans and Alaskan Natives experience high rates of
depression and psychological distress, which contributes to
Native Americans having the highest suicide rate. While the
Department of Veteran Affairs, VA, acknowledges this as a
national crisis that affects all Americans and publishes
reports, it continues to offer limited data. And that may be
the key. If we can size up how big of a challenge it is, we can
apply the appropriate measures to help the veterans that are
considering that alternative.
So sitting before you and sharing, I am very grateful.
There are more issues that we can always talk about. But
anytime you're--when National Congress of American Indians has
our conference, please come and see us and share. We'll share
what we can to help all of the Indian culture. [Speaking in
native language.] Thank you for allowing me to speak today.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Sheldon appears on page 180
of the Appendix.]
Chairman Bost. Thank you, Mr. Sheldon. Mr. McManus, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF JACK MCMANUS, NATIONAL PRESIDENT, VIETNAM VETERANS
OF AMERICA
Mr. McManus. Good morning. I want to thank you all
. This is not the first time I will be presenting to
the Joint Congressional Committee.
Chairman Bost. Mr. McManus, I think your microphone needs
to be put on.
Mr. McManus. Oh, good. We'll start over again.
Chairman Bost. That is so much better. There we go.
Mr. McManus. Well, good morning and thank you all for the
good work you do for the American people, and particularly for
veterans and their families. This is not VVA, nor my first time
presenting to the Joint Congressional Committee on Veterans'
Affairs. We have been the senior vets on the Hill for a long
time.
More importantly, you all know what we represent and you
know what we stand for. We stand for American citizens first
and for all generations of American veterans, not just our era
of veterans. Our mission is to ensure the experiences of
Vietnam veteran generation is never again repeated by our
Nation. Just as you know about VVA, let it be said that we know
all about you. We know that your hard work on this Committee is
motivated by your love of this country, your real and honest
concern for those who have chosen to wear the uniform in
defense of this country. You are the congressional leaders who
will assure that the spirit learned from our experiences will
forever guide the conscience respect, and the way current and
future veterans are valued and treated by our country.
We respectfully ask that you hear and pledge support for
our current priorities in caring for our Nation's returned
heroes.
Since our formation, VVA's top and most solemn priority has
always been the accounting and recovery of the POW service
members. And while I know this is outside the Committee, this
has always been a driving force behind VVA. Today, the families
of 1,577 Americans still listed as MIA from Southeast Asia wait
patiently for answers regarding their unaccounted for loved
ones. Timely and consistent funding of DPAA is an effective way
for Congress to ensure that those families receive the fate
clarifying information and closure that they deserve.
We urge you to honor the following return heroes from
Vietnam by passing two pieces of legislation now on the floor.
The first one is the naming of the VA Medical Center in West
Palm Beach, Florida, in honor of Thomas H. Corey Act, that's
bill H.R. 7333--maybe there's too many threes? Three threes.
And the Donut Dollies Congressional Gold Medal Act, which is
H.R. 3592. Some of you know that Tom Corey for many years on
the Hill as he was our VVA national president. During the Tet
Offensive, an enemy round in the neck left him paralyzed and a
paraplegic. He was 100 percent disabled veteran and a Bronze
Star recipient, and dedicated his entire life to his country
and other veterans.
He was not only one who went above and beyond, there were
others. There are 627 Donut Dollies that volunteered for the
Red Cross during the Vietnam War to serve in the perilous
frontline positions. Their service has long been ignored or
belittled because they are women. They deserve the recognition
of the Congressional Gold Medal.
I can personally say that I experienced exposure to Donut
Dollies in Vietnam, and I can tell you that it was motivating
and moving to me that these civilian women would come over
there and risk everything just to bring us a little bit of
morale boosting, donuts and cookies, and warm lemonade. It was
great.
Several of our priorities this year are going to focus on
the toxic wounds. High on that will be to compel the VA to
execute the Fort McClellan epidemiological study required by
the PACT Act to allow people in that area and around the
country with 650,000 women veterans that served at Fort
McClellan the right to participate and receive health care. We
want to call for a pre-Gulf War burn pit use study and make
sure that the generations that were affected by burn pits prior
to the Gulf War are also recognized and eligible for veteran
benefits.
We also come back for the second year asking to amend the
Blue Water Navy Vietnam Veterans Act of 2019 to extend that 12-
nautical-mile limitation. The intent of Congress in that act
was to open the availability of care and benefits to the Navy
Veterans that served offshore. I think the intent of Congress
was noble, and I think it was right on target. From our
perspective, what happened was when it got into the regulatory
process and it conflicted with some previous public laws or
Federal laws or statutes or whatever you want to call them, and
that, in fact, muddied the water. And when it came out, it was
actually worse than when we went in with it. Okay, so there was
an arbitrary 12-mile, nautical-mile limitation. And if you look
at the map, it is all over the place. And the intent was, let
us cover that is 330,000 Navy Veterans that served in Tonkin
Gulf and the South China Sea.
We want to maintain close congressional oversight on the
implementation of the PACT Act, including a transparent review
of the TEF dollars, how are they being and will be spent in the
future. So, we are not holding a position on that until we hear
what you come up with and your recommendations are.
We want to hold, and still want to hold a hearing on the
oversight hearing on the Toxic Exposure Research Act, which
called for an intergenerational research to investigate birth
defects in descendants of veterans and to investigate that why
that law has not been followed. We are still on that. I am
going to be running out of time here quickly.
We also want to address the persistent challenge to access
providers of healthcare in Puerto Rico by amending the Puerto
Rican tax code to draw more healthcare workers into Puerto Rico
to join in the VA healthcare system. As you know, if I were to
go to work in a private hospital in San Juan and earning the
same money as somebody in the VA system, my take home pay could
be as much as 30 percent different because of the requirements
on the civil service employees versus the requirements that are
on the territorial employees. So, we need to get that addressed
to up that as a priority.
We also would like the VA to reinstate the use of physician
assistance in mental health providers at the VA hospitals and
clinics to address the historic difficulties with access to
mental health care for veterans. Permitting PAs to practice in
this space will allow for the dramatic expansion of access to
mental health services for our Nation's veterans and begin to
address the suicide crisis we are now facing. The enactment of
the 48-hour VSO review period for disability claims, which is a
regulatory process, but we might need help from Congress to get
that reinstated.
Chairman Bost. Mr. McManus, we need to--we are about five--
--
Mr. McManus. Okay.
Chairman Bost.--six minutes over on time.
Mr. McManus. Okay. All right. We provided written testimony
that covers the rest of our priorities. With that, I will end
up and just thank you for your time and your attention, and----
Chairman Bost. Thank you.
Mr. McManus . Your continued support. Thank
you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. McManus appears on page 186
of the Appendix.]
Chairman Bost. Thank you for your testimony. General
McGinn, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF MAJ. GEN. FRANK MCGINN (RET.), PRESIDENT, NATIONAL
GUARD ASSOCIATION OF THE UNITED STATES
Mr. McGinn. Thank you. Chairman Tester, Ranking Member
Moran, Chairman Bost, Ranking Member Takano, other
distinguished Members of the Senate and House Committees. On
behalf of the National Guard Association of the United States,
we thank you for this opportunity to come before you. Your
Committees have dedicated significant time and effort toward
policies which protect and defend those who protect and defend
our Nation. Serving the military naturally comes with a level
of hardship, but the system itself should never add to that
challenge. We look forward to continuing our work with each of
you to improve the quality of life for both those currently
serving and retired.
Our main goal at NGAUS is parity. Parity in the structure
of our force, parity in the acquisition and modernization of
our equipment, and parity in the benefits our members receive.
The operational use of the National Guard has grown
exponentially since 9/11. We now make up 39 percent of the
total Army and 30 percent of the total Air Force.
The weight of the National Guard polls in our national
security plan is extraordinary, yet many Americans fail to
understand the depth of our role as the primary combat reserve
of our defense of the Nation. It is imperative that we change
that narrative.
In my testimony, I will focus on three specific areas key
to recruiting and retaining a National Guard force that remains
prepared to protect our Nation. Increase parity for education
benefits, improve transition assistance, and consistent access
to medical coverage. Regarding education benefit parity. When
an individual joins the military, they invest in our national
security. In return, as a token of our gratitude, we invest in
their future through educational benefits. We are incredibly
grateful for the work done by your Committees and staff to help
elevate the need for parity and how reserve component accrues
GI Bill benefits. While the Forever GI Bill and the FY18 NDAA
made positive advancements to close that gap, there is still
work to be done. Unlike the active component, guardsmen serve
in a variety of statuses that do not accrue GI Bill benefits. A
day in uniform is a day in service to this country. And it is
past time this disparity is corrected.
We are very pleased to see your two Committees introduce
the Guard and Reserve GI Bill Parity Act of 2024. This would
count all statuses, including weekend drills, annual training,
and specific state active duty missions. This is an incredible
step forward, and I know much work has been done and has gone
into the Committee staff level. And NGAUS is extremely grateful
and appreciative.
Our second area concerns the reserve component track for
transition assistance. Retiring from the military is a
significant life event. Transition Assistance Program was
established to help prepare service members for the next
chapter of life once they come off orders. However, guardsmen
come on and off active duty orders multiple times, and each
time, we are required to complete TAP as if we are ending our
military career rather than returning to our regularly
scheduled lives. Not only is this a waste of resources and
time, but it creates a level of fatigue. By the time a
guardsman actually needs TAP, many individuals have gone
through the program four times or more. TAP is mandated to have
three tracks. NGAUS asks that one of those tracks be
rededicated and tailored to the reserve component. The National
Guard and Reserve has unique needs when coming off active duty
orders, and specific attention should be paid to the accrual
and transition of benefits. It is my understanding these
committees are considering language to address this issue and
we ask for your full support.
Our third area of focus is Zero-Cost TRICARE and Dental.
Readiness is our top priority. We must be always ready to
protect, defend, and respond at a moment's notice. Guardsmen
must maintain a constant level of readiness and proficiency.
For the most part, the Department of Defense provides the tools
to promote preparedness. Although we do not ask a soldier to
purchase a Humvee or for an airman to purchase an F-16, yet for
healthcare, the service member is required to purchase their
own out of pocket. As a result, there are currently 130,000
reserve component members without healthcare, and we have units
far below the 75 percent medical deployability goal set by DoD.
In these current times, we cannot afford any percentage of our
team to sit on the bench when it comes to a potential fight
with China, Russia, or Iran. We will absolutely need every
player out in the field. We respectfully ask you to fully
support the Healthcare for Our Troops Act and the Dental Care
for Our Troops Act, providing zero-cost TRICARE and dental
coverage. This will dramatically increase readiness,
recruiting, and retention.
However, the benefits extend far beyond the current force.
A healthy guardsman is a healthy veteran. Preventative care
through the service member's career reduces medical
expenditures after retirement. Consistent coverage would allow
those within our ranks to establish healthy habits for routine
upkeep, develop care plans for long-term health issues, and
address mental health concerns as they arise. There is no
better way to truly put our service members first. Again, I ask
each of you for your support on Healthcare and Dental Care for
Our Troops Acts.
In conclusion, thank you for inviting NGAUS to testify.
Your efforts are critical to the well-being of the National
Guard. I look forward to continuing our work together and
appreciate the leadership from the members and the staff of
this Committee and I welcome your questions. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. McGinn appears on page 197
of the Appendix.]
Chairman Bost. Thank you, General. Mr. Handzuk, you have
been recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Handzuk. Chairman Tester, Ranking----
Chairman Bost. Microphone. Thank you.
Mr. Handzuk. Sorry.
STATEMENT OF JOHN S. HANDZUK, NATIONAL PRESIDENT, FLEET RESERVE
ASSOCIATION
Mr. Handzuk. Chairmans Tester and Bost, Ranking Members
Moran and Takano, and other Members of the Committee. Good
morning. I am John Handzuk, a retired Navy Command Master
Chief, and I currently am the National President of the Fleet
Reserve Association.
I am here today to express the concerns of our members of
the oldest sea service association that has been around for
nearly 100 years, and proud to tell you that on Veterans Day,
November 11 of this year, we celebrate our centennial. As one
of the leading supporters of the PACT Act that was enacted in
the last session of Congress, FRA is grateful for its passage.
It was a top priority of the association and that it be
implemented effectively. Military service for our Nation
requires service members to go places that may expose them to
toxins and cause illness and diseases that may not be diagnosed
for years or even decades after their service. The act was
signed into law in August of 22, and we recognize the fact.
Recently, VA proposed a rule to expand the locations and
timeframes for which VA presumes exposure to Agent Orange and
other herbicides. The FRA members welcome the recent VA
proposed regulation that will implement a new presumption of
exposure to locations where herbicides were tested, used, or
stored outside of Vietnam.
My membership is shocked to hear that nearly a quarter
million veterans may be at risk of being prescribed medicine
they are allergic to or would interact poorly with their
existing medications because of issues with the new VA
electronic health record system. We are thankful to the VA
Inspector General's efforts with the House Veterans' Affairs
Committee, Technology Modernization Subcommittee, oversight to
ID this problem, and we hope that it will be corrected soon.
The FRA supports legislation authorizing immediate payment
of concurrent receipt of full military retired pay and veterans
disability compensation for all those eligible. I heard earlier
this morning, the Legion Commander state, that it was like a
tax. If I am questioned, I will get into that further.
The membership of the association strongly believes
reducing a retiree's retired pay because they are disabled is,
in fact, an injustice. Therefore, we strongly support the Major
Richard Star Act, sponsored by Chairman Tester and
Representative Bilirakis, that expands concurrent receipt to
include combat-related special compensation veterans who are
medically retired with less than 20 years of service. And you
may be aware, over two thirds of Congress co-sponsor this
concurrent receipt legislation. We need to pass this bill.
Speaking of which, I have been in the FRA 41 years. It has
been one of our priorities for as long as I have been a member
of the FRA. And we still wait.
Aging veterans represent a segment of vulnerable
individuals increasingly being targeted by bad actors preying
upon their benefits that they have earned. This is why the FRA
supports the GUARD VA Benefits Act that would reinstate
penalties for charging veterans and survivors unauthorized fees
related to claims for VA benefits. The National Association of
Attorneys General dispatched a letter to congressional leaders
last year on behalf of a bipartisan group of 44 state attorneys
general urging passing of the GUARD Act.
Speaking about veteran suicide, and I get uncomfortable
with this, but one suicide is one too many. The FRA is grateful
to the VA for allowing any veteran experiencing suicidal crisis
to get emergency care at no cost from either a VA or non-VA
healthcare facility. And we are also appreciative that
enrollment in a VA system is not required. Specifically, more
than 32,000 veterans in acute suicidal crisis have received
free emergency health care under the new lifesaving policy. But
unfortunately, veterans still remain at an elevated risk.
We are pleased to know that veterans experiencing
homelessness have declined by 11 percent since January 2020. In
total, the estimated number of veterans experiencing
homelessness in America has declined by 55 percent since 2010.
The majority of FRA members were opposed to burial
restrictions--I am sorry I didn't pause enough there, for the
in-ground burials at Arlington National Cemetery. More than 73
percent of FRA members surveyed last January support creating a
second national cemetery, perhaps on the west coast, in lieu of
additional restrictions on burials at Arlington National, and
still be able to obtain the full military honors they
rightfully earned. We support Expanding America's National
Cemetery Act. It would authorize the DoD and the VA to
transform an existing VA cemetery to maintain internment with
full honors as Arlington National reaches capacity. We should
not be forced to change their well-earned plans because of
unnecessary administrative rules.
I appreciate this opportunity to testify on behalf of the
Fleet Reserve Association, and I stand ready to answer your
questions. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Handzuk appears on page 203
of the Appendix.]
Chairman Bost. Thank you. We are going to go to questions.
I am going to recognize myself for 3 minutes. Mr. Lischinsky,
the JWV wrote a letter to the Secretary condemning a VA
Attorney's appalling and public antisemitism remarks about
Israel hostages in November. Are you satisfied with the VA's
response and how this incident had been handled?
Mr. Lischinsky. Thank you, Chairman. Thank you, Chairman
Bost. In response to that, on the 29 January, we had a meeting
with Secretary McDonough, and it was based on questions that
was coming to the JWV membership. Some of our members were
concerned, and they asked the question that how do I know that
that employee did not handle my case, did not evaluate my case,
didn't touch my case. And we brought that to the attention of
Secretary McDonough, and he has assured us that there was no
bias and no prejudice in her work.
I go back to what I said earlier, that education is the
important factor. And I hear this throughout this panel, that
education, no matter what the topic is, is very important. So
JWV stands behind that. We will be glad to work with anybody
that wants to deal with antisemitism, bigotry, and hate. And
although I said earlier that we fought for freedom of speech,
and we understand freedom of speech, and we value freedom of
speech, but when freedom of speech is brought into the
workforce and it has a connotation of antisemitism, bigotry,
and hate, and your employees are affected by it, and our
customers are affected by it, and our stakeholders affected by
it, it is no longer freedom of speech. Thank you, sir, for
asking that.
Chairman Bost. Commander Campos, I appreciate your support
and helping us get Senator Elizabeth Dole veterans package over
the line. What would the consequences of not passing this
important legislation be?
Ms. Campos. The consequences, sir, these are--of not
providing resources to those that are actually taking care of
veterans. This is a bipartisan package. There is absolutely no
reason why it shouldn't move forward. Understand that there is
no issues with funding and so on, but a lot of caregivers and
veterans are counting on it. And each day and the services that
these caregivers provide, there is no amount of money this
country could pay for the services that they provide in the way
that they provided. So, a lot of veterans, a lot of our
members, a lot of the military coalition members, a lot of our
colleagues here are waiting for this package to get across the
line.
Chairman Bost. Thank you. Ranking Member Takano, you are
recognized.
Mr. Takano. Mr. Chairman, I may go over slightly, sir, is
that okay with you? Great. Ms. Monet, it is great to see you
again. HUD-VASH Voucher utilization has long been an issue we,
VA and HUD, have tried to address. What are some actions
Congress can take to increase voucher utilization and get
veterans in need into housing?
Ms. Monet. So, I think the most immediate action you can
take is to really push VA to address this issue that they are
having with their hiring caps and setting aside special purpose
funding, but not actually filling those positions. I think that
is very much low-hanging fruit. The funding is there. They gain
nothing by leaving special purpose funding on the table, and
veterans are harmed. I think there are other things that you
can do to increase housing stock, to incentivize PHAs and
landlords to take these vouchers. But I think the easiest thing
to start with is to really work with your friends at 810
Vermont.
Mr. Takano. What about, are there other eligibility issues
Congress needs to address to ensure that all veterans who need
homeless services can access them?
Ms. Monet. Absolutely. I think that there are many
restrictions based on discharge statuses that need to be
addressed across all programs, particularly for HUD-VASH and
the HPACT program. But with regard specifically to HUD-VASH,
there are these issues around the counting of disability
compensation as income that do actually leave the most
vulnerable veterans out from accessing vouchers, and project-
based vouchers in particular. And that is a really hard pill to
swallow, because project-based settings are generally most
optimized for the most vulnerable and most disabled veterans.
So, it is just really hard to see them left out.
Mr. Takano. What about the issue about the benefits making
some veterans ineligible for housing, is that also an issue we
need to fix as well?
Ms. Monet. Absolutely.
Mr. Takano. That is a serious issue that the Mayor of Los
Angeles is trying to deal with in terms of the eligibility
cliff. Ironically, the housing we build for veterans, we can't
put veterans in there because their disability benefits make
them ineligible. So that seems to be contradictory. We are
quickly approaching a year since the flexible authorities the
VA utilized during the pandemic to address homelessness
expired. How is the failure to get the Home Act signed into law
affecting VA and community providers' ability to get veterans
housed?
Ms. Monet. Well, there are some instances where the damage
just has been done, right, where grantees have left programs
and just are no longer operating services in their community.
But there are other areas that could really make a difference,
right. When you think about extending the Section 4201
assistance, I think back to the end of the public health
emergency, and I think within the first six weeks of the end of
the emergency, we were hearing that VA canceled something like
38,000 prescheduled transportation rides for veterans. And
there were 10,000, I think over 10,000, they said, missed
medical and mental health appointments across the country just
because veterans couldn't access what they needed to. I think
there was even one veteran they mentioned that passed away
because they couldn't get to dialysis appointments. And, I
mean, that is very basic and simple, and it sounds
counterintuitive, but resources like that really do make a
difference for veterans who are struggling and have next to
nothing.
Mr. Takano. So the expired authorities really have had
tremendous dramatic impact?
Ms. Monet. Absolutely.
Mr. Takano. Thank you. Thank you for your testimony. Mr.
Sheldon, I am glad to see that the National Congress of
American Indians is here this morning, and that Tribal and
Native voices are recognized in this hearing before our
Committee. And welcome. I want to thank you for your detailed
testimony regarding the barriers Native veterans faced when
accessing VA services. A piece of your testimony that really
struck me were the issues related to housing on Native lands.
And I agree with you that being underhoused or homeless is a
health disparity, and this is an issue we should address with
urgency. So, underutilization of the VA Native American Direct
Loan program seems to be a direct cause of housing insecurity
that some Native Americans face--Native veterans face. How can
VA improve this program to better reach and serve Native
veterans in obtaining stable housing?
Mr. Sheldon. Thank you very much. I appreciate that
question. As I was prepping for this testimony, I came upon the
NADL program and what it does in housing and such, and so what
it was is a new program. So how can we educate Indian country
on the programs that are being offered? And to me, that is the
cusp of the question. Working with NCAI, we can use that arm to
let all of our Tribes across the Nation know programs, working
better with our veterans.
Mr. Takano. So, you are saying better outreach. But have
you seen any improvements to VA's outreach on Tribal lands
regarding the NADL program, or could they do better?
Mr. Sheldon. Yes. Yes, absolutely. I think we had Veterans'
Secretary out at New Orleans, Louisiana. And that type of
outreach in person means a lot to us in Indian country, and we
are able to better get the data and share it with other Tribes
and veterans in Indian country.
Mr. Sheldon. Great. Well, thank you. My last line of
questioning is to Mr. McManus. You spoke, Mr. McManus, about
the importance of the PACT Act for veterans that you represent.
But in your testimony, you also presented to us some cohorts
that were left out of the PACT Act. In light of that, can you
tell us the importance, you know, can you tell us what concerns
you have about capping or sunsetting the spending that we do on
toxic exposure, on care and benefits for the toxic-exposed
veterans? Given that we have maybe more cohorts to consider,
including into the PACT Act.
Mr. McManus. Let me start by saying that we believe that
the PACT Act overall has been a tremendous success and one of
the greatest pieces of veterans' legislation that has come out
in the last half a century. So, like any piece of legislation,
it is subject to debate even after it is enacted and signed
into law. But it is also subject to regulatory interpretation
and frequently intent of legislation, when it gets to
regulatory interpretation, becomes different.
We think that one of the great things, basis and
foundations of the PACT Act was the fact that we weren't going
to have to go through a political quagmire every time we wanted
to get into a new toxin or a new location where toxins were or
whatever, and that the funding was there for the benefit of the
veterans and whatever. We understand that that is up for
discussion, and that hadn't been universal; and we will wait
until we hear what your recommendations are before we weigh in
on that. But we think that really, the strength of that Toxic
Exposure Fund Foundation is the foundation of that law, because
it makes it carry on from one generation to another generation
to another generation.
Mr. Takano. Well, specifically, the burden of proof has
been moved away from the veteran, and the benefit of the doubt
has been expanded to the veteran. But we also, in order to do
that, we had to have a funding mechanism, and some are
suggesting we should cap or diminish that funding. And I just
want to make sure that you all had a chance to talk about the
importance of the funding part of this.
Mr. McManus. We hear pro and con on that, and we haven't
heard anybody come up with any rational program that will
continue to address the legislation of changing it. So, we are
not in favor of changing it unless it is something that is
reasonable.
Mr. Takano. I hear you. Well, thank you, Mr. McManus.
Mr. McManus. Thank you.
Mr. Takano. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Bost. Mr. Levin, you are recognized for 3 minutes.
HON. MIKE LEVIN,
U.S. REPRESENTATIVE FROM CALIFORNIA
Mr. Levin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Monet, great to see
you again. You mentioned that you have been working for three
years to extend the flexibilities and GPD increases provided in
Isakson and Roe. Homeless veterans have now been without needed
resources for 10 months since the expiration of these
authorities, and unfortunately, they are being held hostage in
exchange for other policy concessions. My question is, is there
any reason we shouldn't pass the provisions we agree on now
rather than waiting until we have agreement on everything?
Ms. Monet. From my perspective, no. There are over 35,000
veterans homeless on any night, all waiting for you to act, and
there are countless other provisions in the bill that a lot of
the folks on this panel have discussed, and I do think that
urgency is the utmost priority from my perspective.
Mr. Levin. Well, not surprisingly, I agree with you. I
think we should pass what we agree on. And around here, we are
not going to agree on everything, but we need to pass what we
agree on right away. Ms. Mullaney, thank you for your support
of the Guard and Reserve GI Bill Parity Act, which I
reintroduced last week. Obviously, there will be a cost
associated with it, and it will be competing for limited
offsets with other proposals. But as our Committees work
through the legislative process, can you tell us TAP's view on
what Congress should address first when it comes to things like
GI Bill parity, Chapter 35 sunset and full MHA for online
classes?
Ms. Harrison Mullaney. Yes, thank you for the question.
Guard and Reserve Parity and Chapter 35 sunset is TAP's top
educational priority. We really believe that we should focus on
getting everyone benefits before we start whittling through who
should get increased. Those that currently have nothing have no
opportunity to go to school. Congress, we encourage Congress to
prioritize those before moving forward with the online MHA.
Mr. Levin. Thank you. Commander Campos and Major General
McGinn, I appreciate your organizations' support for parity as
well. Commander Campos, perhaps we will start with you. Can you
speak about the importance of the legislation to your members
and the urgency with which you think Congress should act on the
proposal?
Ms. Campos. Thank you for that question and for the support
on this important bill. GI, you know, as I mentioned in my
remarks, the Guard and Reserve Parity is an opportunity to
encourage those that are leaving active duty to join the
reserves. The GI Bill is a recruiting and retention tool, and
so we can't afford as a country, when we have recruiting
challenges in the active duty component as well as the reserve
component, to have that talent lost. And so, we see that this
is a National Defense issue, and we recognize, and should
recognize it, as a country, that these are important
contributions that these service members give and this benefit
and what we need to modernize the all-volunteer force.
Mr. Levin. Thank you. And, Mr. Chairman, if I could just
have another minute or so. General McGinn, if you have anything
you would like to add.
Mr. McGinn. Yes, thank you, sir, for the question. I would
echo my colleagues' comments about recruiting and retention at
a time when our country is really struggling with recruiting
and retention. I think the GI Parity Act is one good way to
entice and attract talent into our services, specifically our
reserve force, and also to retain them. And to retain them. And
so, as you know, the cost of growing a soldier or an airmen is
expensive. The more we can increase our retention rates, then
that is going to assist us. So that is a cost savings there
just by retaining some of our soldiers and our airmen.
And secondly, as far as the parity piece, service and Title
32 status should not be treated any differently than service
and Title 10 status. As I mentioned, a day of service is a day
of service. So that the status of which you are in, I think, is
certainly something that needs to be corrected.
But to back up onto my recruiting and retention, I think
that is the key issue to our members, and I think that is
something that we all see as a struggle these days.
Mr. Levin. Mr. Chairman, am I okay for one more minute?
Colonel Lischinsky, in your testimony, you called for gender-
specific care at all VA facilities and more providers with
expertise in women's health. I was proud to support the Deborah
Sampson Act, which included several provisions to improve care
for women veterans at VA. That bill included a provision that
authorized $1 million annually through fiscal year '25 and
additional funding for the Women Veterans Health Mini-Residency
program.
Since its implementation in 2008, around 10,000 VA
providers have participated in this program, which trains
nurses and physicians working in primary care and emergency
medicine on core women's health topics, including trauma-
informed care, intimate partner violence, and menopause. I am
currently working with my colleague and friend, Representative
Buddy Carter of Georgia, on legislation to reauthorize this
crucial funding and ensure the Women Veterans Health Mini-
Residency program can continue to train VA providers. Colonel
Lischinsky, why is it so important that we train VA providers
to provide gender-specific care?
Mr. Lischinsky. Thank you, Mr. Levin.
Mr. Levin. There you are.
Mr. Lischinsky. Thank you, Mr. Levin. You know, having
served as a combat service support brigade commander, women
were a big part of that organization. We have come a long way
since the days before. I don't want to say old, but the days
before, that we handed a female pilot a uniform, a male
uniform, and we said to them, make it fit, it will work. Some
of our healthcare systems are a little bit antiquated, and we
are expecting that our female soldiers, airmen, marines
throughout the whole service to make them fit in the world that
I served in, we need to continue to have the Mini-Residency
program. We thank you for the funding of that. And we also say
that we should be taking best practices that are out in the
civilian world for our female service members. We should be
adapting them as well so they could have fit. They are entitled
to the exact same health care system as a male is. So, I do
want to say on behalf of the Jewish War Veterans of the United
States and for all veteran organizations, thank you for
supporting that, and thank you for continuing to support that.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, sir. Thanks, everybody, for your
testimony, and I will yield back.
Chairman Bost. And I want to say thank you to everyone that
was here. And I want to say I apologize for the lack of amount
of members being here. It was a scheduling issue that occurred
both in the Senate and in the House. Know that this Committee,
both our Committee on the House side, and I am sure the Senate
Committee, if Tester was here, he would say that as well. We
are here to serve you. We thank you for the partnership that
you provide with us to make sure that our veterans are being
provided for. We know that there is other areas we have to
expand on and work on. We also know that we are required to
make sure that whatever we are doing, that the funding is
coming from somewhere. It is a very big challenge. But I have
told you in my opening, and I do mean that we are going to work
every way possible to make sure that as many needs as we can
are being provided for. And just making a promise to you and
moving a bill that is not going to move on both sides of the
aisle and not going to get signed by the President is just
that. It is a nice show, but I am not here for a show. I am
here to try to help our veterans. I told you off the beginning
that it was personal to me, like it is to you. And I thank you
all for being here, and I thank everyone for your testimony and
everything you do every day. With that, we are going to adjourn
this. And this concludes the joint hearing.
[Whereupon, at 12:55 p.m., the Joint Committees were
adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
Prepared Statements

