FIVE YEARS OF THE FIRST STEP ACT: REIMAGINING REHABILITATION AND PROTECTING PUBLIC SAFETY ---------- WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 17, 2024 United States Senate, Committee on the Judiciary, Washington, DC. The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m., in Room G50, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Richard J. Durbin, Chair of the Committee, presiding. Present: Senators Durbin , Whitehouse, Klobuchar, Hirono, Booker, Padilla, Welch, Butler, Graham, Cornyn, Lee, Hawley, and Tillis. OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. RICHARD J. DURBIN, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS Chair Durbin. Hearing of the Senate Judiciary Committee will come to order. Senator Graham, the Ranking Member, is running a few minutes late. He told us to go ahead and start without him, he'll join us. I want to thank the witnesses that are here today, and members of the Sentencing Commission, I believe are also in attendance. Thank you for joining us. This hearing, ``Five Years of the First Step Act: Reimagining Rehabilitation and Protecting Public Safety,'' is long overdue. Today, the Committee will hear from four witnesses about the success of the First Step Act. It is the most significant criminal justice reform legislation in a generation. I want to thank Ranking Member Graham and his staff for working with us to select today's witnesses. It echoes the bipartisan spirit of cooperation that led to the enactment of this landmark legislation. I also want to thank everyone who has joined us today, including the U.S. Sentencing Commission Chair Judge Carlton Reeves and his colleagues, who've been hard at work updating the Federal sentencing guidelines to reflect the First Step's reform. Last month marked the fifth anniversary of Congress coming together and passing the First Step Act by an overwhelming bipartisan majority in both the House and the Senate. At the outset, I'll turn to a video about the passage and the impact it's had.  Chair Durbin. I was proud to champion this landmark legislation, and I want to give special credit to Senator Grassley who couldn't be here today, he's not feeling well, but he was a real leader on this effort. It was signed into law by President Trump. It was truly bipartisan from the start. It included support with Senator Grassley, as I mentioned, Senator Booker, Senator Lee, Senator Whitehouse, and Senator Cornyn. I believe those two individuals are with us here this morning. It acknowledges the obvious. The vast majority of people who are incarcerated will one day be released, so we should help prepare them for successful reentry. In the last 5 years, this landmark legislation has reduced the population in our overcrowded Federal prisons, safely and effectively reuniting families and revitalizing communities. In addition to looking toward the future, the First Step Act helps to remedy the effects of the harsh and misguided drug sentencing laws from the 1980s. I remember that era very well. I was a Member of the House of Representatives. The arrival of crack cocaine scared the hell out of us. We decided to impose new sentencing guidelines, which would make it clear to the public once and for all that if you do crack cocaine, we're going to hit you and hit you hard. We sure as hell did. 100 to 1 disparity in sentencing between powder cocaine and crack cocaine. The net result of it all, sadly, was not what we'd hoped for. The price of crack cocaine on the street went down instead of up. The number of users went up instead of down. And we had the largest Federal prison population in the history of the United States, predominantly African Americans who were convicted of those crimes. The sentences were astronomic. What used to be a matter of a handful of years turned into 10, 15, 20, 25 and beyond. That was the reality of the situation that we faced when we started talking about reforming the situation. The First Step Act helps to remedy the effects of that, those sentencing laws in the 1980s. I authored legislation, the Fair Sentencing Act of 2010, that reduced the disparity of 100 to 1 between crack and powder, to 18. It's a long story as to how we came up with that magic number, but that was the number we had to live with. The First Step Act makes Fair Sentencing Act retroactive, allowing those still serving sentences under the disparity to petition for re-sentencing. I'm thankful for the tireless efforts of many dedicated advocates and families who never gave up hope that this bill could become law. Since the First Step Act's passage, I've met so many Americans who've successfully returned home because of this historic legislation. Some would still be in prison today if Congress had not passed the First Step Act and President Trump had not signed it. Today, we will hear from one of them. One of our witnesses, Matthew Charles, I told him he was the star of the show after that video. I'm glad you're here, Mr. Charles. The First Step Act has been quite a success. Of almost 30,000 people released under its reforms through January 2023, only 12.4 percent have been arrested for new crimes. Compare that to Bureau of Prison's overall recidivism rate, more than three times that number, 43 percent. Even with this legislation's achievement in reducing recidivism, we must remember that it is indeed a first step in a long journey toward thinking about rethinking rehabilitation and reversing failed approaches in our criminal justice system. In order to make our system fair, we must continue to learn the proven successes, smart on crime policies like the First Step Act. We must provide more opportunities for those who were incarcerated to reenter society successfully, reunite with their families, and contribute to their communities. Now, make no mistake, as much as I believe in what we've done and would do it all over again, there've been some of these situations where people have been released and broken my heart. I thought we'd got them on the right path, but it didn't happen. We can't give up on so many who are going to be successful in reuniting with families and rehabilitating their lives because of those few, but I think of them as well. Five years ago we wrote the blueprint for Reimagining Rehabilitation and Protecting Public Safety, and we know by the numbers that it works. Today I'm looking forward to reflecting on what we can achieve moving forward. Senator Graham has not arrived yet. I'm going to recognize Senator Cornyn, will you give the opening statement, and thank you for your participation and help on this issue from the start. Senator Cornyn. You bet. STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN CORNYN, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS Senator Cornyn. Well, Mr. Chairman, thank you for giving us the opportunity to discuss the crime in America and the important role played by our justice system. As we know, as you noted, the First Step Act sailed through Congress 5 years ago with overwhelming support on both sides of the aisle. It passed a Republican-led Senate, 87 to 12. It passed a Republican-led House, 358 to 36. Those were the days, and President Trump signed it into law. When we debated the First Step Act, we talked about the revolving door of the criminal justice system. We aimed to reduce recidivism rates and prevent formerly incarcerated people from landing behind bars again, if possible. Portions of the law were aimed at slowing the revolving door, particularly those that focus on prison programming and evidence-based recidivism reduction training that have been successfully pioneered in many States, including my home State of Texas. This Congress, I've continued to work with on these priorities with many of my colleagues on both sides of the aisle. Senator Coons and I, for example, have a bill to improve supervised release. Senator Whitehouse and I are seeking to reintroduce our Stronger Act, which will help incarcerated persons battling substance use disorders and help educate law enforcement on best practices. That Bill passed the Senate unanimously last Congress and we're aiming to get it over the finish line this Congress. Rehabilitation, when possible, was and remains an important part of our criminal justice system. But in order for criminals to be rehabilitated, they first need to be held accountable. Unfortunately, this administration and many liberal DAs across the country have gone to great lengths to ensure that dangerous criminals never walk through the doors of the criminal justice system. Some of the most egregious examples have come straight from our Department of Justice, our Nation's lead law enforcement agency. In December 2022, the Attorney General upended a long- standing DOJ policy to charge the most serious readily provable offense. Under this administration, prosecutors aren't to try to hold violent criminals and drug traffickers accountable to the fullest extent of the law. The Garland memo directs prosecutors to consider whether non-criminal alternatives like pretrial diversion would serve Federal law enforcement interests. Additionally, the Garland memo kneecaps prosecutors from using the tools that Congress has given Federal prosecutors like mandatory minimum sentences. If a violent criminal is behind bars, he will not harm further on innocent people. If a drug trafficker serves time behind bars, he will not continue to pour poison onto the streets. Sadly, the Biden administration and liberal prosecutors appear to be more sympathetic to the dangerous criminals than they do to the law- abiding citizens they harm. Just look at the soft-on-crime policies of Rachael Rollins, who was nominated and confirmed to be the U.S. attorney for the District of Massachusetts. Every single person on this side of the aisle warned that she would not enforce the law. She was candid about it. I recall Senator Cruz spending 20 minutes walking through her top 15 list of crimes that she would not prosecute. These were serious crimes including resisting arrest, destruction of property, drug dealing, and shoplifting. Well, we know how it ended for her. She resigned under serious allegations and ongoing investigations related to corruption and abuse of authority. Yet this administration has continued to double down on soft-on-crime policies. It set up a task force to use Federal prosecution to take down Christians praying in front of abortion clinics. It labeled Catholics who attend mass in Latin as threats. It declined to bring any 1507 prosecutions for ongoing threats and harassment of our Supreme Court Justices. Well, and then there was the famous Garland--or I should say, infamous school board memorandum that the Attorney General still hasn't rescinded, even though the main predicate was from a now-rescinded letter from the National School Board Association. That memo, which apparently still stands, and which is official Department of Justice policy, directs the Justice Department, the FBI, and the National Security Division, to inject itself in school board meetings across the country where parents have a constitutional right to peacefully assemble and make their voices heard. Well, I could go on about the failures of the Biden administration to simply enforce the law, and the dire consequences that ensue from that. But let me just conclude with the 108,000 Americans who lost their lives last year due to drugs, illegal drugs, primarily coming across the U.S. Mexico border. We've had repeated comments under oath by the Secretary of Homeland Security that the border is secure. Well, he finally fessed up last week and said that 85 percent of the people who they encounter at the border are simply released into the interior of the United States. So, the border obviously is not secure as long as drugs like fentanyl, that took the lives of 71,000 Americans last year alone, continue to flow into the United States and into our communities, across our State and Nation. So the American people deserve to feel safe in their communities, but that simply will not happen until we get back to a simple law and order agenda. I believe rehabilitation should continue to be an aspiration of our criminal justice system, and certainly that was my reason for my support for the First Step Act. But the American people, I think, are questioning correctly whether our law enforcement agencies and whether our Department of Justice and liberal district attorneys in cities throughout the Nation are equally committed to public safety. Thank you. Chair Durbin. Thank you, Senator. And fortunately we have a bipartisan effort underway to deal with border security. The sooner it reports the better. I want to thank those who are participating in that effort. I think we all understand that challenges at our border we've never seen before in terms of the volumes of people coming seeking asylum or refugee status. And that is not a good system. It is not an orderly system. It is one that needs to be changed, and I hope we can do it soon. In a matter of weeks at the most come up with a Senate bipartisan approach to it long overdue. I also want to recognize the Chair of the Crime Subcommittee, Senator Booker, who was an active participant in the formation and passage of the First Step Act, and if Senator Cotton, his Ranking Member is going to attend, I'll recognize him as well. Senator Booker. STATEMENT OF HON. CORY BOOKER, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY Senator Booker. Chairman, thank you very much. Truly one of the best experiences of my life was working on this legislation, rolling up sleeves, sitting at tables without cameras around and working with good faith people on both sides of the aisle to do something that was very remarkable. And the accomplishments you laid plain here, and I think it should be celebrated, the success we've made, Democrats and Republicans coming together--Republican administration, who I got to know very well during the process. I think we have this falsehood that often rhetorically is heard here in Washington, that somehow Americans are not equally concerned, whether you're a Republican or a Democrat or an Independent, about the safety of their communities. I come from being a mayor of a city which has Republicans, Democrats, Independents, where the number one issue was public safety. I'm not sure if anybody here in the Senate more so than me, perhaps equally, was on the ground in communities fighting for safer neighborhoods. I found out very quickly that the police leadership, from the FBI Director to my local beat cops, knew that the solutions to security were not solely law enforcement. That in fact they felt like they were treating symptoms of a larger problem. And it was a wave of using tools to create safety that clearly were not achieving it, because in the years before I was mayor of my city, we were the greatest incarceration capital, not only of the world, but in all of humanity. The United States of America locked up more people than any other Nation or past empire when it comes to just the total gross amount of humanity that was being put into jails and prisons. The United States of America had one out of every four incarcerated people on the planet Earth. It had one out of every three incarcerated women on the planet Earth. And yet during that same time, we saw the drug problem in America getting worse. And as a result of over-incarceration, hyper-incarceration, and doing things to people in prison, we saw remarkably high recidivism rates. When I became mayor of the city of Newark, I realized that just helping people coming out of prison, being that the recidivism rates were unconsciously high, could be one of the best strategies. And we started doing a whole bunch of other things to approach this problem. Now, it was particularly acute to me that this was driving racial disparities in our country, because incarceration rates amongst low income communities and Black and brown communities were incredibly higher than in other communities, even though rates of drug use or drug selling were no different between Blacks and whites. It led to the unconscionable reality to me that not only were we the incarceration Nation, but we incarcerated African Americans at such a high rate that there were more Blacks under criminal supervision than all the slaves in 1865. And to look around when I became mayor in 2006, you started seeing examples coming from Red States of people taking a different approach. Texas became a model for prison reform in 2007 when the State allocated funds for drug treatment, mental health, and rehabilitation for incarcerated individuals. The Texas recidivism rate fell as did violent crime dramatically. By 2018, Texas had closed four prisons, saving Texans $3 billion, and show that you can lower your prison population and lower crime by focusing on empowering people, creating more beloved communities, and dealing with the healthcare issues, and mental healthcare issues, and addiction issues. Red State after Red State were showing this. South Carolina passed major sentencing reform in 2010 and saw revocations for parole violations fall 33 percent, recidivism rates falling below to 13 percent, and the State's prison population went down 14 percent, saving taxpayers almost half a billion dollars, and again, crime went down. Georgia Republican Governor Nathan Deal signed prison reform legislation into law in 2012, and the State had one of the Nation's highest incarceration rates, costing over a billion dollars a year. But within three years of lowering their prison population, Georgia saw their crime dramatically fall, and Georgia also went on to enact juvenile justice reform and other criminal justice reforms that ultimately saw a 3.5 percent in its overall prison population decline from 2016 to 2012. And so it frustrates me when opportunistically we use issues of fear and understandable concerns about crime to drive wedges between our society, as opposed to looking at the practitioners out there in States and local levels who are actually showing a lot of success. As much as we'd like to think that ideas that were passed in the first step are somehow original, they're not. They came from Republicans and Democrats who just wanted to solve problems. And we didn't do everything that Georgia, South Carolina, and Texas did. We did not do all the innovations coming out of Red States. We did some of them, and that's why we called it the First Step Act. And so today we herald a celebration. You and I, Mr. Chairman, have met with a lot of the families that had their liberated people from prison reclaiming the ideals of our democracy because the most sacrosanct aspect of our democracy, if you read our founding documents, we were formed for our own safety and security for the common defense, and we were formed around the ideals of liberty. And so we could continue in this institution pointing fingers, damning and condemning, and adding to a culture of contempt, or we could get back to what ideas are working in States and cities, and how can we at the Federal Government do practical common sense things to give strength and support to that. I sat last night with Denver's mayor, who's set remarkable records for eradicating homeless populations in his community. And he openly talked about the Republican business leaders he worked with finding practical solutions that, hey, had the secondary effect of limiting crime that's caused often in these homelessness encampments. And so I just want to encourage us, one of the best experiences I've had in my decade in the Senate was around this bill. Working with people that our side vilifies, from Jared Kushner to Lindsey Graham, and they're working with people that, I'm sure I'm not a beloved person in the media circles in which my colleagues on the other side of the operate. But we just said, let's come together and do what is already working, what evidence-based shows it works, and have the byproduct of lowering crime, lowering recidivism, and doing what this country was called to do: to create more beloved communities. I've gone to the homes of people who were released by this bill. You want to talk about family values? Reunite someone who is over incarcerated with their children. You want to talk about stronger communities? People who are released by this bill are leading nonprofits in some of these communities dedicated to keeping other people out of prison. And so, every issue that we sometimes opportunistically use to beat the other side, I promise you, as I sat down with a mayor last night for dinner, local mayors don't care about left or right. As Fiorello LaGuardia said, there's no republican or democratic way to fix a pothole. We on this Committee could do more to get people access to treatment. We could do more to stop mental health people from committing crimes. We could do more to make our prisons places of empowerment and not compounding trauma. We could do more to help people who are hurting. We could do more in our country. Common sense, bipartisan work to solve problems as opposed to curse the darkness. And so this is a point of light. I celebrate it. But if this is the first step, let's do more. Let's do more. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chair Durbin. Thanks, Senator Booker. It's time for the next step, and I think we all should be open to that possibility. I want to welcome our consensus witness panel. First witness will be Matthew Charles, a senior policy advisor with the criminal justice reform organization, FAMM, and one of the first people released from Federal prison under the First Step Act. We also are joined by J. Charles Smith, State's attorney for Frederick County, Maryland, and president of the National District Attorney's Association. We also welcome Ja'Ron Smith, who served as a Deputy Assistant to former President Trump on the White House Domestic Policy Council. And last but not least, we'll hear from Steve Markle, special education teacher with the Bureau of Prisons and the National Secretary Treasurer for the Council of Prison Locals. Let me lay out the mechanics. After swearing in the witnesses, they'll each have 5 minutes to make an opening statement. Members will then have 5 minutes each to ask questions of those members of the panel. So let me administer the oath and ask the panel to please rise. Raise your right hand please.  Chair Durbin. Let the record reflect that the witnesses thankfully have answered in the affirmative. And we're going to start with Mr. Charles and your opening statement. Please proceed. STATEMENT OF MATTHEW CHARLES, FIRST STEP ACT BENEFICIARY, NASHVILLE, TENNESSEE Mr. Charles. Thank you, Chairman Durbin, Ranking Member Graham, and Members of the Committee. Good morning. My name is Matthew Charles and I'm happy to be here. Since I was released under the First Step Act 5 years ago, I've spoken on several occasions about my journey and that legislation. I've even spoken to some of you before in this very Chamber. I'm happy to be here today to mark the 5-year anniversary of this landmark legislation. I've been called a man of few words but many smiles. But today I've got both. I'm honored and pleased to be with you now to celebrate and reflect on the First Step Act and the difference it's made in my life and thousands of others. But before I talk to you about who I am today, you need to hear about who I used to be, because my story is a story of redemption. That's an empty word, unless change has happened, and I can assure you, change has definitely happened. I grew up in a dangerous public housing block in North Carolina. My days and nights were filled with fear. I was consumed with trying to get as far away as possible from my father's relentless abuse and frequent beatings. From the age I could talk and walk, these things had occurred in my life. Due to that environment and my father's influence, I soon found myself with these huge wells of anger and frustration and not much else. I began to act out as a way of coping. I got as mean and as tough as my father was, and I made a lot of very bad choices. Incidentally, I share all this not as an excuse, but to help you understand why I made the bad choices that resulted in my incarceration. When I turned 18, in an effort to break free from my home life and straighten out, I joined the Army. I still had so much anger in me because of my past though. And when my service was over, I turned to wayward living and selling drugs. This landed me in State prison for about 5 years. Then things got even worse. I was arrested in 1995 and convicted in 1996 for selling 216 grams of crack cocaine to an informant and illegally possessing a gun. Because of my prior criminal activity, and because I sold crack cocaine instead of powder cocaine, I was given a 35-year sentence. I want to be clear, I believe that my incarceration was justified. I was far down the wrong path and my incarceration allowed me to slow down, look inwardly and began to heal and rehabilitate. However, I believe my 35-year prison sentence was excessive. If crack and powder cocaine were treated the same when I was sentenced, my sentence would've been 20 years and not 35 years, but the 100 to 1 disparity was in place at that time. I told you my story was about redemption. Well, here's where that begins, the good part. It was before sentencing in the county jail and I met a guy named Jesus Duran. We got to talking and when he was sentenced and transferring out, he left me all of his things. I think he felt sorry for me, but among those things was a Bible. I had never read the Bible before in my life, had no interest in reading it, but for some reason, sitting there in that jail cell, I cracked it open. And as I read those words, turning the pages slowly, I felt something deep inside of me change. All that anger and pain and bitterness that had controlled me up until that point, I gave it up. Just let go. I surrendered my heart and life over to the Lord Jesus Christ. From that moment on, my attitude toward people changed, right down to the officers that brought me my food trays at the jail. I thought about the hard journey ahead of me, 35 years, not with agony and fear, but now with determination to be better and not waste my life any further. I went to Federal prison and continued to live out the new life that I had accepted according to my faith. I worked as a GED tutor, a law library clerk, and as a mentor to younger people. I helped illiterate prisoners understand the letters they received from the courts and their own families. And I drafted filings for them. Over the next 21 years, I didn't receive a single disciplinary infraction. And every day when I woke up, I lived my life like someone who deserved a second chance, not like someone whose life will be defined by my worst actions. All my years in prisons, all of us inside together watch criminal justice reforms on the horizon. We cheered when they happened and were crushed when they went nowhere. Senators, we also watch you and we prayed that you would help us. When it seemed like the First Step Act might actually pass, we we're all glued to the television. We watched President Donald Trump as he was about to sign it, holding our breath. And when he finally did, we cheered and shouted, hallelujah. And I was released. Thanks to many of you, especially Senator Grassley and Chairman Durbin, I was spared from spending another decade behind bars. I left prison for good on January 3, 2019. Just two weeks after President Trump signed the bill into law. I became the first person to benefit from the retroactive provision in the First Step Act. I had a lot of amazing life moments since my release. I was the guest of President Trump at the 2019 State of the Union. I met Senators from across the country, including many on this Committee. But the most rewarding experience and the most important work I have done, has been advocating for those that I left behind. There are a lot of people still behind bars who, like I was, are committed to making changes and finding a new path, who do not need to spend decades in prison to learn about their lesson, or to learn their lessons. I've been working hard for a system that is fair and just and doesn't harm families and communities by keeping people incarcerated unnecessarily. Today as we reflect about the First Step Act, I am reminded of the powerful broad bipartisan support this bill enjoyed when it was signed into law by President Trump. I'm here today to encourage Congress to continue on that path of bipartisan criminal justice reform. Some people may fear that criminal justice reform will make our communities less safe. But I'm here to tell you, that your work on the First Step Act has proven that this line of thinking is incorrect. I've told you my story, but if I'm not special--and I'm not--I'm not unique. In my advocacy work, I've met many, many beneficiaries of the First Step Act who are out here in freedom, making their families stronger and their communities safer. They are living proof that reform does work. And 5 years of data bears us out as well. Because of the First Step Act, some of our country's most excessive and unfair sentencing practices, misguided sentencing laws meant to keep us safer, which in reality has had the opposite effect, have been reformed. This means that dangerous overcrowding in prisons is decreasing, rehabilitation rates are on the rise, and thousands of families like mine have been reunited and are stronger. As to the fear people released will go right back into a life of crime, of the nearly 30,000 people released under the First Step Act, only 12.4 percent have been arrested or returned to Federal custody, much lower than a general Federal recidivism rate of 43 percent, which we also watched in the video earlier. Between 2022 and 2023, participation in rehabilitative programming and productive activities in prison has jumped by more than a third because of the First Step Act. The vast majority of people in Federal prison will be released one day, over 90 percent of them will. Thanks to the First Step Act, they will be better prepared to return to their families and communities and be productive law-abiding members of society. Remember, I told you that mine was a story of redemption. I told you about that moment in my jail cell before I even got to prison, when I felt redeemed, the day that I accepted the Lord Jesus Christ. And I told you that my life in prison was one of positive productivity. But the main reason I'm here today is to tell you that my redemption meant nothing compared to what it means now. Now that the First Step Act has placed me out here in freedom, it's out here that I can really walk the walk, and make my family stronger, my community safer, and my country more just and fair. Thank you for the First Step Act, and thank you for this opportunity.  Chair Durbin. Thank you, Mr. Charles. Mr. Charles Smith is next. STATEMENT OF CHARLIE SMITH, PRESIDENT, NATIONAL DISTRICT ATTORNEYS ASSOCIATION, FREDERICK, MARYLAND Mr. C. Smith. Thank you, Chairman Durbin, and Members of this Committee. My name's Charlie Smith. I'm the State's attorney for Frederick County, Maryland, just off 270. I'm also president of the National District Attorney's Association, which is the oldest and the largest national nonpartisan, nonprofit organization. We represent over 3,000 elected State's attorneys and district attorneys across the country, as well as over 40,000 assistant prosecutors. Part of our mission is to serve as the voice of America's prosecutor. We recognize the vital role that prosecutors play in the safety of local communities, including evaluating and making ongoing improvements to our criminal justice system that promote fairness, accountability, efficiency, and justice. And so I do appreciate this opportunity to talk about NDAA's effort toward realizing goals of the First Step Act. By way of background, we are and should be, as prosecutors, at the very forefront of continuously improving our criminal justice system. We must support public safety and enforcement of the law while promoting accountability, rehabilitation, and alternatives to incarceration. So we are tasked with a constitutional duty of protecting our communities. We serve justice each and every day in our courtrooms, balancing the needs of the victims of crime against protecting the innocent. And once again, we're acutely aware of the need to improve and reform our criminal justice system as we're doing it each and every day. So, the First Step Act was supported by NDAA. It was a bipartisan effort to address front-end sentencing change and back-end prison reform. And we felt it struck an appropriate balance between addressing the needs of the current prison population, while ensuring criminals are penalized appropriately. The FSA provided meaningful change where truly dangerous criminals are locked up for an appropriate period of time, and those with addiction or mental health issues have a chance for treatment and rehabilitation. In terms of the First Step Act implementation, one of the great things about the Act is its proven effectiveness for low- risk non-violent offenders while ensuring the public is protected from high-risk violent offenders. So only one year after the First Step Act was signed into law, the Bureau of Prisons received a risk and needs assessment through the use of a tool known as PATTERN. And again, this tool was intended to calculate the risk of recidivism of inmates as required by the FSA. It also made adjustments to good time credit--allowed eligible inmates to earn good time credits for participating and completing assigned evidence-based recidivism reduction programs. So the BOP policies were updated to expand the use of home confinement for low risk individuals and pilot programs for the elderly and terminally ill inmates. And so the Department's drug treatment strategy has enrolled thousands of inmates in RDAP, which is the Residential Drug Abuse Program. And last, they also use Medication Assisted Treatment Program available to qualified inmates. What we'd like to emphasize is that the First Step Act is not just a feel-good act that sounds good in theory. It really is not. The data suggests that recidivism rates have dropped substantially, and we've heard those rates from the Chairman, from Mr. Charles to my right, that are substantially lower than the other rates. I mean, you're talking 12.4 percent versus 46.2 percent. I mean, those are compelling statistics, and go to show that FSA was again, not just some kind of feel-good act, but something that really had proven results. In terms of the State impact, thanks to the reauthorization of the Second Chance Act originally passed by Congress in 2008 under FSA, grant-funded initiatives and programs designed to continue to reduce recidivism and improve the reentry process remained intact. The Second Chance Act allowed nonprofit organizations to be eligible grant recipients for programs centered on career training and substance use disorder treatment. It also established partnerships between Federal prisons and faith-based and community-based organizations around recidivism reducing programming. From 2009 to 2022, BJA, the Bureau of Justice Assistance, awarded more than 1,100 Second Chance Act grants amounting to more than $600 million. Through Fiscal Year 2022, these grants have been administered in 845 State and local agencies across the United States and territories, with over 400,000 participants served. In Senator Graham's home State of South Carolina, the Department of Parole, Probation, and Pardon services created a leadership academy in four counties to promote coordination and information sharing among supervisors and managers. Officers were trained on effective practices. Grant funds were dispersed toward community-based substance use treatment services to offset cost to participants, and risk and need assessment results were used to modify caseload and guide officers' decisions about interventions. As a result, revocations decreased from 34 percent to 19 percent in a 5-year period, from 2010 to 2015. Again, meaningful stats. The New Jersey Administrative Office of the Courts used grant funds toward risk-based supervision pilot programs in three counties. Again, they used a standardized risk assessment to evaluate the needs of people on probation, and modified supervision practices and services based on these findings. Probation officers' caseloads were adjusted to focus more resources on individuals assessed as a high risk, not low risk. Pilot participants were less likely to be arrested or to violate their parole conditions within 210 days of the start of the program. The rearrest rate was 11 percent compared to 18 percent in the control group. And the frequency of violating parole conditions was 7 percent compared to 21 percent in the control group. The Santa Maria Hostel in Harris County, Texas, provides treatment for substance use disorders, supportive housing, and mentoring services to formerly incarcerated women. The Second Chance Act grant funds were used to hire recovery coaches to provide one-on-one support to women in its Path to Recovery program to assist with attaining their reentry goals, as well as connect women with housing, education, and employment services. And these few stories--there are many-- highlight that common-sense Federal legislation like the FSA improves our criminal justice system and inspires States to mirror these efforts at the local level. Chair Durbin. Thank you, Mr. Smith. Mr. C. Smith. Thank you.  Chair Durbin. Appreciate it. Mr. Markle. STATEMENT OF STEVE MARKLE, NATIONAL SECRETARY-TREASURER, COUNCIL OF PRISON LOCALS, ROCKVILLE, INDIANA Mr. Markle. Good morning, Chairman Durbin, Ranking Member Graham, and Members of the Committee. I'm honored to represent the Council of Prison Locals and provide a statement on the implementation of the First Step Act within the Federal Bureau of Prisons. The Council of Prison Locals represents nearly 30,000 Bureau of Prisons employees who work tirelessly inside America's prisons. These dedicated correctional professionals ensure the safety of inmates, staff, and the public even in the face of adversity posed by some of the world's most dangerous individuals. Having worked for the Federal Bureau of Prisons for over 20 years as a special education teacher, I have firsthand experience witnessing the positive impact of the First Step Act. I can attest to the added desire for inmates to attend GED courses, which will allow them upon completion to enroll in vocational courses. We have seen the increase of inmates enrolling in apprenticeship courses and participation in adult continuing education classes. The dyslexia screening requirement of the First Step Act has assisted in identifying inmates with learning disabilities. Identifying disabilities has enhanced our staff's ability to assist these inmates. While the BOP is known and provided educational courses for years, this Act has highlighted the need to enhance what has been previously provided. An enormous amount of classes have been added since the implementation of the First Step Act. Over the years, we have collaborated with Chair Durbin's office and Senator Grassley's office in regards to the First Step Act and its effect on the Bureau. Our Council also continue to work with BOP representatives to develop policies for the successful implementation and management of the First Step Act. The Council remains committed to the First Step Act and the goal to reduce repeat offenses and to prepare inmates for release. Active participation in programs is crucial for successful preparation. Inmates now show more interest in programs that they may have previously ignored. They currently receive credit for being on waiting lists, trying to enroll into full programs. To ensure inmates receive the necessary skills and education, it's important to increase staffing, and also to increase programming spaces. The Council supports the FSA's motive and the ability to motivate inmates to stay engaged in programming, reducing idleness. I'm eager to discuss the First Step Act's effects on the dedicated staff members who carry out the Bureau's mission each day. Previous Directors of the Bureau of Prisons have lauded the positive impact to the First Step Act before this very Committee, and we acknowledge its importance as well. However, we believe that certain factors, if left unaddressed, will limit the Acts full potential. Our primary concern is the current staffing levels within the Bureau of Prisons. Since the signing of the First Step Act, the filled positions in the Bureau of Prisons have decreased from over 43,000 to the current amount of 34,000. This reduction of 8,708 staff members raises concerns about our ability to effectively carry out our responsibilities. The impact of these staffing cuts particularly evident among our correctional officers, who serve as our first line of security. At the end of 2023, we have approximately 12,300 correctional officers, which are 8,000 below the appropriated number from Congress. When requested for staffing members, the Bureau often provides ratios and percentages to Members of Congress. We have only 60.1 percent of our appropriated correctional officers right now. The insufficiency leads to the overuse of a procedure known as augmentation and reassignment. This is where non-correctional officers are assigned to perform the duties of correctional officers. This not only compromises the safety by reducing the number of staff available to respond to emergencies, but also hinders the provision of programming in the First Step Act. To fully realize the Act's potential, it's crucial to address the critical staffing crisis within the Bureau of Prisons. The Council believes that staffing crisis can only be resolved by addressing a pay band issue. The current pay structure within the Bureau is significant lower than other Federal law enforcement agencies. Additionally, the Bureau's pay scale is non-competitive with also State and local law enforcement, or positions in the private sector. Without addressing this pay disparity, the Bureau will struggle to attract and retain employees, ultimately hindering the overall success of the First Step Act. In conclusion, Chairman Durbin, Ranking Member Graham, and Members of the Committee, the First Step Act has been very successful, however, it has yet to reach its full potential and will continue on this path until the critical staffing and pay crisis can be addressed. Thank you for the opportunity to share our concerns with the Committee, and we're happy to answer questions.  Chair Durbin. Thanks, Mr. Markle. Mr. Smith. STATEMENT OF JA'RON SMITH, FORMER DEPUTY ASSISTANT FOR DOMESTIC POLICY FOR PRESIDENT TRUMP, WASHINGTON, DC Mr. J. Smith. Thank you, Chairman Durbin, Ranking Member Graham, and Members of the Judiciary Committee. I am honored here today to commemorate the 5-year anniversary of the First Step Act. Growing up, I've witnessed firsthand the damage that a broken criminal justice system can reap on families and communities. So, when I got the chance to work on a landmark criminal justice reform bill during my time in the Trump Administration, I jumped on it. I worked with many people in this room on both sides of the aisle; right-of-center groups such as Right on Crime, Americans for Prosperity, the American Conservative Union, Tzedek Association, Prison Fellowship, the Deason Center, and many others supported the bill and continued to lead on criminal justice reform today. We worked hand-in-hand with Democratic leaders in the House and the Senate, and with left-of-center groups such as the ACLU, Cut 50 or Dream, and Families Against Mandatory Minimums. Together, we passed a bill that has had tremendous success. However, some critics of the law have cherry-picked rare cases of recidivism to claim the First Step Act contributed to the rise in crime during the pandemic. That is simply not true. According to Federal data, the recidivism rate for Federal prisoners is about 43 percent. For those released under the First Step Act, the rate is just 12 percent, and technical violations, not new crimes, account for a third of that number. We're now at a crossroads with a critical choice to make. We can either pursue policies that have proven to fail, or we can follow in the footsteps of the First Step Act and continue to adopt policies that are smart on crime. That is exactly what I've continued to work on since leaving the White House. I've partnered with right-of-center and law enforcement groups to continue pushing for reforms like the First Step Act that are smart on crime. We created a coalition called Public Safety Solutions for America that is guided by four common sense principles for reducing crime. First, support our police by properly funding them. We need to ensure that there are enough police on the streets and that departments have the amount of money they need to attract, train, and retain the best talent. Second, focus law enforcement's time and resources on preventing and solving the most serious crimes. Police are too often asked to play the role of social worker. Specialized community groups must take on a larger role in managing mental illness, drug use, homelessness, so police can focus more on preventing and solving violent crime. Third, implement evidence-based policies that have been proven to reduce violent crime. For example, Dallas Police Chief Eddie Garcia has used proven tactics such as focused deterrence, hotspot policing, and urban blight reduction. As a result, overall violent crime has decreased in the city for the third year in a row. Fourth, continue exploring, sharing, and enacting smart-on- crime solutions that hold people accountable, increase public safety, and respect the dignity of all human beings. These types of smart-on-crime solutions resonate with conservatives. Pollings from the Adams Project indicates that 86 percent of Republican primary voters agree with the policies in the First Step Act. America deserves a more effective criminal justice system, one that supports our police, holds criminals accountable, and helps those who have earned a second chance successfully reenter society without wasting taxpayer dollars. The First Step Act was a bipartisan win that accomplished all of this. We should strive for more bipartisan solutions, because at the end of the day, safety for all Americans' should not be political. And I just want to say lastly that in my experience, and being blessed to be a part of this great piece of legislation, the experience has showed me that anything is possible in America. Even in the most partisan environments, our leaders can come together and focus on reform that changes Americans' lives and helps empower individuals. And so I encourage you to stay focused and committed to this effort and continue to do the hard work, staying up late and working through your differences. Because at the end of the day, it's all about our common goals as America to be a better country. Thank you for your time and thank you. Good day.  Chair Durbin. Thank you very much, Mr. Smith. And let me personally thank you for your constructive suggestions of things that we might consider moving forward. Mr. Markle, thank you for identifying the reality on the ground of the number of corrections officers at risk every day, and some of the challenges which we've created in Congress because of our lack of funding appropriately in that field. But I'd like to really go back to a point I made earlier with Senator Booker. It's nice to feel good about what we've achieved with the First Step Act, and we should. There are a lot of great success stories. But what is the next step? What is the next step? If we look at the current situation with the law and its application, and the current situation facing us with incarceration, we still have many, many challenges. I'd like to invite you to give me any suggestions or ideas. If you want to reflect on it and get back to the Committee, that's fine too. But let me start with Mr. Charles. There was a moment when your life turned around. Was that all your decision, your experience? Was there something external that made a difference to you that you think could help someone else in the future? Mr. Charles. I think what actually took place in my life was, I was at a period to where I was in the county jail, my past, like I said, had been one of shame. And at that moment, I think the fact that I was arrested, in that county jail, and open to change, that it actually happened. But I don't want to get caught up on the fact that my story is unique in any capacity, because people actually change or become rehabilitated for various reasons. A lot of times it may be because they've now been separated from their family and their loved ones for a prolonged period of time. It may be due to the fact that they've aged since they've been incarcerated. And it may just be to the fact that they've waken up and realized because of what I've done, I don't have an opportunity to go anywhere. And that's kind of like what took place in my life. The change happened, but I wasn't released until 22 years later. Yes. Chair Durbin. Well, I will tell you that nobody is asking for the Durbin plan for shaping up Congress, but I'm going to give part of it to you anyway. I think that every Member of Congress in every two year term or every six year term, should visit a foreign country. I think it's important to come to understand that country even better and come to understand your home even more. And secondly, visit a prison. I've done that regularly throughout my congressional career. It's important that Members of Congress see this firsthand and meet the people in these prisons, those who are serving time and those who are watching them. It'll give you a better understanding of our system of justice. And you'll realize, as Mr. Markle indicated, that there is some danger associated with it for sure. There are people there who are dangerous people and will always be dangerous, and we have to acknowledge that reality. But there are also people like you, Mr. Charles, who has that one moment of Paul on the road to Tarsus, if I got that correct, and struck from his horse and changed his life, and you had that moment. Mr. Smith from the District Attorney's Association, what is your thought about what else we could be doing or should be doing from the First Step Act? Mr. C. Smith. Well, the First Step Act did a great job of differentiating between good people making bad decisions, and bad people making bad decisions. okay? The bad people who make bad decisions, they stay in jail because they should. They're a threat to public safety. The good people that made a bad decision that were convicted for it, went to jail for it, are getting rehabilitated and released earlier, as well they should. I think there's a narrative out there about mass incarceration. Well, without mass criminality, there would be no incarceration. So I think what we need to do is focus on why people are committing crime in the first place. We have a problem with crime in the United States of America, juvenile crime especially. On a recent call to the White House, I was told that car thefts among juveniles are almost a million car thefts across the United States of America. Chair Durbin. It's a terrible problem. Terrible challenge. Mr. C. Smith. It's a terrible problem. So, we're doing a great job of implementing reforms like the First Step Act. I think what we're not really doing a great job of, is figuring out why people are committing crime in the first place. I don't know whether it's a lack of opportunity, whether it's a lack of family, education, I'm not sure. But we need to definitely focus on why people are taking a first step toward committing crime and do something about that. Chair Durbin. Thank you. Senator Cornyn. Senator Cornyn. Thank you very much to each of the witnesses for your contribution toward this important legislation. And it is nice to be able to revisit something that happened 5 years ago and to see that we were able to work together on a bipartisan, bicameral basis and get something done that's significant in so many different ways. Mr. Smith, I want to just go over with you some of your comments because I think they're really important and bear emphasis. When we talk about over-incarceration, that's a general comment and, I guess, designed to apply to all people convicted of crimes. But you made the important point that--and I can't think of a better way to say it--differentiating between good people making bad decisions and bad people making bad decisions. In other words, you talked about the low risk nonviolent nature of the people who benefited primarily by the First Step Act and the role of the risk assessments--evidence-based risk assessments, to determine who is likely to commit further crimes if released and--and who would be unlikely to be. So, do you think that's an important point to emphasize in all this? It's not just saying we're going to open up the prison doors and release serial murderers or people that are likely to continue to commit serious crimes, but rather a smart, targeted way to reduce incarceration, where people will take advantage of the programs and deal with whether it's a substance abuse problem or mental health problem, and are likely to be successful like Mr. Charles has been able to be so far. Mr. C. Smith. Thank you, Senator. You used the word strategic, I believe. And that's what we need to do. We need to collect data. We're currently doing that through transparency projects, first and foremost. But one of the reasons why I, as an elected Republican prosecutor am in favor of data, is to disprove what I believe to be false narrative out there about who it is we prosecute and how long we seek prison sentences. Because without the data, it's just unfounded opinion. And so we need to be informed, and we need to realize what it is that we're doing. And so without data we can't do that. And I think one of the things that--that First Step did, was these tools. They said, ``Hey, look, we're going to take a look; we're going to drill down; we're going to see the data. This data is irrelevant for whether we need to release somebody. This data is relevant.'' So they got rid of some data points that just made no sense. And so I think if we continue to do that, we're going to have informed decision-making about who is violent and who is not, who needs to come back out into the community and who should not, because let's face it, we still have a lot of repeat violent offenders out there that are harming our communities, urban and suburban for that matter. Senator Cornyn. Let me ask you further about nonviolent offenders. There's some people who suggest that people who deal and distribute, sell illegal drugs, can be nonviolent offenders. Is that your experience, that drug dealers are nonviolent? Mr. C. Smith. That's a tricky question. So, there are some that are, and some that are not. Quite frankly, I grew up in East Baltimore, one of five kids in a row home. Two of my sisters were drug addicts. My one sister was a heroin addict for many years, and died in her thirties, largely in part to her addiction. So, she was a dealer user. So, she was nonviolent. She'd, you know, sell a little bit, use a little bit. There's plenty of those people out there. And then we have drug merchants who have guns, they have organizations, they are brutal in their tactics. And so, once again, let's take a look at the data. Let's see who we're dealing with here and treat each one appropriately. Senator Cornyn. Well, what I was thinking about, and appreciate the distinction that you drew, is the 108,000 Americans who died as a result of drug overdoses and poisoning from fentanyl last year. And the way that that actually gets distributed in communities throughout the United States. Is it your experience that criminal street gangs and others in communities all around the Nation are the principle mode of distributing the drugs that come across the border and that make their way into our communities? Mr. C. Smith. I don't know if the criminal street gang would be the organization that brings it across the border, but they're definitely the organization that distributes it in our local communities back home. There's no doubt about that. Senator Cornyn. And they are the ones most likely to be associated with gun violence and other--other crimes in our communities, correct? Mr. C. Smith. It's not uncommon for guns to be used in that activity. That's correct. Senator Cornyn. Thank you very much. Mr. C. Smith. You're welcome. Chair Durbin. Senator Hirono. Senator Hirono. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to thank all the panelists, and it is very clear that the First Step Act has seen a lot of success, and it was done in a bipartisan way. And I thank the Chairman, the Ranking Member, as well as Senator Booker, who, for him, this is a very important issue. I do want to ask each of you with the diverse backgrounds that you have, as you talked about the successes under the First Step Act, for each of you--and we can start with Mr. Charles--what is the most effective next step that we can take to follow up on the First Step Act that we should consider pursuing in a bipartisan way? I know that the Chairman asked some of you this, but I just wanted to get a sense from the entire panel, what do you think is the most important next step that we should contemplate? Mr. Charles. Thank you, Senator. I would say in regards to that question, there are two things that immediately come to mind. I believe that there should be Second Look laws passed by this Congress for those Federal prisoners. And the reason being is because whenever I gave my testimony earlier, I spoke about me serving 22 years in prison, and I also spoke about my saving date, you know, that I accepted my savior in 1995, and I was sentenced in 1996 to 35 years. So, for over 20 something years, I was in Federal prison with not one disciplinary infraction. I was doing everything that you would want somebody incarcerated to do to show signs of rehabilitation. But nobody knew that except me, my family, and those that were formerly incarcerated around me, because the judge never knew that; he sentenced me, and I was gone. And the society never knew that. They just knew how I used to be when I was out in the street. So, Second Look laws will allow that person to petition the court, and then the court will be able to look at that person's record of incarceration and see have there been any, you know, substantial changes, also to see what type of vocational or educational courses or classes that they have achieved taken. And then he would be able to make a conscious decision, of course, with the district attorney also looking at that petition and filing whatever statement that he want to for or opposing it, and then be able to say, okay, this person has made a significant change in his life and no longer remains a threat or a public safety factor, and therefore could be safely released back into society. So I would say to create some Second Look laws is one, and the other is--one that I'm hoping this Congress will pass this year--is pass the Equal Act. And the reason being is because I was sentenced under 100 to 1. I stated earlier in my opening statement, how I was given a 35-year sentence as opposed to a 20-year sentence because of that disparity between those two drugs. We understand today, we understood as early as 2000, 2010, when it was lowered to 18 to 1, Chairman Durbin stated how the 18 to 1 ratio just, he didn't say came out of thin air, but it came up with something that was acceptable before this Congress. But there needs to be no disparity between those two drugs. And---- Senator Hirono. Yes. Thank you. I'm really sorry to interrupt you, but yes, I know that we need to do more sentencing reform. I'm sorry that you spent so many years in prison, but I thank you for participating. Mr. Smith, what is the next important thing that we should pursue? And I have less than 2 minutes, so if you could just make it very brief. Mr. C. Smith. I think we need to be smarter about how inmates earn diminution credits and get out. So, as we said, we don't just want a second look. We want the prison population to understand this is what they need to do in order to get out earlier, as opposed to just coming before a parole board saying, ``Hey, I've been here and haven't done anything wrong.'' Let's focus on, ``I've been here and I've done a lot of things right, and therefore, I'm reformed, I'm rehabilitated, and I am less likely to reoffend when I get out of prison.'' Senator Hirono. Mr. Markle. Mr. Markle. I would say implementation. We have been doing the best we can with what we have. We need more resources, we need better policies. Our agency we work for sometimes isn't the most transparent to Congress, but what we need to do is provide you all with the information you need to pass the laws, and then we need to have the resources we need on the ground to actually implement those. Senator Hirono. Mr. Smith Mr. J. Smith. Yes, I would agree with Mr. Markle, that certainly more funding to implement the First Step Act, and being able to stand that up is going to help with further reducing recidivism. But I also think focusing on community supervision. I know that Mr. Cornyn mentioned legislation that he sponsored to reform our supervision, that also will help with recidivism. As you can imagine, with the First Step Act, a number of the individuals that recidivated was from technical violations, which we would need to reform in the Act; the Community Supervision Act actually does that work. And so I think that would be a excellent second step. Senator Hirono. Thank you. Thank you very much. Just one more point. We do have halfway houses for people who are coming out of prison. Do all of you acknowledge that that is an important step in having a person come back into the community, to have these kinds of places for them to go to within their own communities? Does anybody disagree with the importance of these halfway houses? Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chair Durbin. Thank Senator Hirono. Senator Cornyn. Mr. Chairman, may I make a unanimous consent request? Chair Durbin. Sure. Senator Cornyn. I'd like to ask unanimous consent that a statement from the National Association of Assistant United States Attorneys be made part of the record. Chair Durbin. Without objection.  Senator Cornyn. Thank you. Chair Durbin. Senator Lee, you're next. Senator Lee. Thanks so much, Mr. Chairman. I feel a great sense of pride at the fact that we're now marking the 5-year mark from the passage of the First Step Act. This was a huge event. It was a big accomplishment within Congress, but far more importantly, this is a huge development to the men and women who have benefited from it ever since then. Especially for those who are now able to go on and live peaceful, law- abiding, meaningful lives with their families and in their communities. And it's a real testament to the wisdom of this bill that we've got you, Mr. Charles, here with us. I've really enjoyed getting to know you. I got to know you shortly after you were released from prison as the first individual to be released onto the First Step Act. And Ja'Ron, it's great to see you as always. And your work in the last administration was absolutely essential to getting this across the finish line. And of course, we have here today a number of Members of this Committee who were very involved in this measure. And it was a pleasure to work with the Chairman, with Senator Booker, with Senator Cornyn, and so many others who were part of the effort. This, of course, was not the beginning or the end. It did represent a culmination of many years of work together on both sides of the aisle until this finally got passed and signed into law by President Trump. And there was a lot of hard work that went into this effort on this Committee on both sides of the aisle. It's absolutely essential as we celebrate this milestone, Mr. Chairman, that we differentiate between this legislation and the overwhelmingly positive effects that it's had; that we differentiate this measure and what we celebrate from it, from something that's totally different from it, which it's often confused and can sometimes be mistaken. The violent crime wave sweeping across our country has absolutely nothing to do with the First Step Act. That is a wave that's caused by a completely independent force. Something having to do with prosecutors across the country who were just deciding not to prosecute entire swaths of crime, including some significant categories of violent crime, some of the most egregious offenses. And it's alarming to see the complete disregard that some prosecutors show for public safety in their deluded effort to advance some other kind of interest other than the rule of law by just promising not to prosecute entire categories of crime. Now, some have criticized the First Step Act for today's crimes, but that's real wildly inaccurate. The First Step Act, of course, does absolutely nothing to change the sentences applicable for violent crimes, as Mr. Smith said--Mr. Ja'Ron Smith, the First Step Act, ``is about developing and implementing a system in which nonviolent prisoners are given the incentive to improve their behavior and ultimately improve themselves, gaining the education and tools they'll need to succeed when they eventually do leave prison.'' I couldn't agree more. And blaming the First Step Act for problems that are caused by deliberate prosecutorial inaction, is about the same as getting your cavity filled by your dentist one day, and the next day when your basement floods blaming your dentist for the flooding. The results of the First Step Act itself have been overwhelmingly positive. In August 2023, the Council on Criminal Justice released a report showing that individuals released under the First Step Act had a recidivism rate 37 percent lower than those released prior to the FSA were similarly situated. And even with the 10,000 prisoners released under the FSA, FSA beneficiaries accounted for a minuscule portion. We're talking about 0.02 percent of national arrests, two one hundredths of 1 percent of all national arrests. I meet regularly with First Step Act beneficiaries like Matthew Charles here, and including last month when I met with a group of entrepreneurs, homeowners--men and women who are now able to live with their families in their communities and lead very productive lives. And some folks, like Weldon Angelos, were facing life sentences or effective life sentences for nonviolent drug offenses. Mr. Angelos, of course, was what first sparked my attention in criminal justice reform when, back in 2004, he was sentenced to 55 years in prison for selling three dime bags of marijuana to what turned out to be an undercover reporter--someone working with the police--an undercover agent, a confidential informant. And because of the fact that he was charged for each of those dime bags sold over a 72 hour period, and because he had a gun on his person at the time of those transactions totaling no more than $350--a gun that was neither brandished nor discharged in connection with the offense--he was subject to the 924(c) stacking problem, where those were each treated as individual predicate offenses under the three strikes law, leading the Federal judge who sentenced him no choice but to give him 55 years. Judge Paul Cassell himself, a former Federal prosecutor, hardly known as minimum Cassell, not somebody known as being soft on crime, made the unusual step of issuing an opinion disagreeing with the sentence he was about to impose. He said, ``There are rapists, there are murderers, hijackers, terrorists who don't get this much time in prison. And yet, I, as a Federal district judge, have no choice but to send you away to prison for 55 years.'' And then he said something that would haunt me ever since then; he said, ``Only Congress can solve this problem.'' And so that's what got me involved in this effort. And what got me originally working with Senator Durbin after I got to the Senate. I'm grateful to him and so many others who worked hard on this effort. But the work is not done. One of many problems that we've got with the 924(c) stacking problem, we fixed it prospectively in the First Step Act, still needs to be fixed retrospectively. Mr. Angelos is out of prison only because President Obama commuted his sentence, and President Trump later pardoned him. But there's a lot left to be done, and I look forward to doing that. Thank you very much. Chair Durbin. Thank you, Senator Lee. And I thank you personally for working so assiduously on this problem, having seen it firsthand. Thank you very much. Senator Booker. Senator Booker. Thanks so much. First of all, thank you all, everybody in the panel for being here. It means a lot to me. Steve, can I start with you? Just because you have so much insight. I can't tell you how much benefit I get of visiting Federal prisons, State prisons, jails, and actually turning to the people that work there every day. And it's amazing the wisdom that they have about just commonsense solutions and ideas. One of the things that concerns me is the practical impact of the staffing shortages going on right now and what that means for incarcerated individuals as well as, frankly, the safety and well-being of the people that work. What can you give us in terms of insights about what we should be doing about that problem? Mr. Markle. Well, I appreciate that Senator. Our number one concern, and it has been for years, is not filling the correctional officer positions that we've been appropriated through Congress. I throw some numbers out there, and you know, right now we are 8,000 correctional officers short from what was appropriated from Congress. That's where it all starts. If we don't fill the correctional officer positions then we don't have the first line security in our institutions to protect inmates and staff. But it also affects the programming for First Step Act because we're constantly pulling teachers, recreation specialists, case managers, counselors, out of their primary jobs of actually, you know, working to reduce recidivism and First Step Act programming, and we're actually utilizing them to fill a correction officer spot. That's where it has to stop right there. If we can fix the staffing crisis we have, I think this program will just flourish in the future. Senator Booker. Yes. And that's frustrating to me that we have this wisdom. We know what's working, but we're not filling spots. Number one, I think is a safety issue for correctional officers as well as for inmates. But then the other thing is, it's failing. It's undermining the implementation of the First Step Act. Another thing I always do when I visit facilities is, I turn to both people that work there as correctional officers and wardens. I always ask them the question, ``Are there people in this institution that are wasting taxpayer dollars and really shouldn't be here?'' And even the toughest wardens or correctional officers look at me and say, ``Absolutely, yes.'' And one of those populations is just the elderly, that folks that have been there for years, sometimes decades, and there's legislation that is talking about ways to get those folks who really have aged, who are costing taxpayers even more money because there's lots of costs associated with their age. Would you agree with that conclusion? Mr. Markle. I believe it's unique to the individuals that we're talking about. I believe that there's a certain percent of the populations that fall within that category. There's a certain percent, based on their sentencing that they've had before, that wouldn't. But I think if the empirical data would support it, then it's something that should be looked at. I can't say that the elderly population, they don't cause any of the issues we have in Federal prisons as far as discipline and other issues, but I would say it's probably lower than the rest of the prison population. Senator Booker. Right. And there's some pilot programs that are showing a lot of promise in this case. I think some work that we should do together. Real quick, there are a lot of actually interesting pilot programs going on in our Federal prisons, and in some State prisons, I know, you know, a lot of them from agricultural farming work to work with animals and care. If you could see some of the pilot programs that you know about off the top of your head and say, ``Gosh, if Congress would just expand this successful program, it would have such an impact on the working conditions of the people, of correctional officers, and the well-being and eventual success of incarcerated individuals.'' What are some things that come to mind when I ask that question? Mr. Markle. I think vocational programs through education are the most important. It's important to have more vocational because as people progress through GED and they graduate, they can move on to those. But those individuals that already have high school diplomas and may already have GEDs, they can take those immediately upon being incarcerated. I think those hands- on experiences where you get firsthand knowledge on some sort of a trade that you can take with you later on, I think those are the most important. I work at FCC Terre Haute, and they just started a rescue dog program. And it's flourishing so far, they want to expand it. And I think that those are the type of programs that are very beneficial, not only to the inmates involved, but to communities around the prisons as well. Senator Booker. And all the data I've seen shows a dollar invested in just need simple education program--GED, BA, graduate degrees--returns to the taxpayers a lot in terms of dropping the recidivism rates. It's a smart investment of money. And for us, again, to ban people from getting Pell Grants, for example, it seems like a nonsensical waste of a taxpayer opportunity. You would agree? Mr. Markle. When I started, there was Pell Grants still, and I have nothing negative to say about that. I think the more benefits we give, and the more availability we have for inmates to provide any type of education or receive any type of education is important. As long as the Bureau of Prisons and the staff implement it, the resources are there on our side of the table too. That's the most important part. Senator Booker. Yes. I thank you. And again, to everybody sitting there, friends of mine now, just thank you all for the continued work and the testimony you given today. And I just think it underlines the question I was giving, just that there's still so much low hanging fruit in terms of things we should just get done, like chip shots, I would say foul shots. I just don't know, Chairman, whether you are good at that or not, but, so I'll say layups as well. Chair Durbin. Layups, yes. Senator Booker. Layups, okay.  Chair Durbin. Thanks a lot, Senator Booker. Senator Welch. Senator Welch. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank Senator Booker and Senator Lee for their great work on this. I was a public defender in Vermont, and so many of my clients had mental health issues, some were homeless. And it was as though, I mean, you've heard this before, but in frustration in our inability to address issues of mental health, a lot of those folks ended up in the prison system and then had a hard time getting out. I'll ask all of you, what do we do about that? I think the First Step Act has been incredibly helpful in acknowledging that there's some folks who really are good to be getting back out on the street. But talk to me about how we can have the criminal justice system not be the mental health system of last resort. I'll start with the prosecutor here. Mr. C. Smith. Thank you, Senator. We implemented in Frederick County a mental health court about three years ago. I think the specialty courts are critically important because you take a look at a segment of the population, the offending population, and again, you try to figure out, why are they offending? That it's crime fighting. What people don't realize is--they feel like mental health courts sort of soft-on-crime type of stuff, but it truly is crime fighting. You're preventing these people from re- offending and therefore preventing crime from reoccurring. So I do believe that mental health courts, where you get people who are not lawyers but are mental health providers and clinicians in the process, so that they can determine what's best for this person. And again, once again, be strategic in terms of the offender and preventing further offense. Senator Welch. Well, thank you. You know, the one thing that's so frustrating about that is that if a person has like an addiction problem, that is tough for them to address, and it's not as though a lecture's going to do it and they're going to elapse and relapse. But we still seem in this country, much more than any other countries, to rely on the prison system to be the place in the criminal justice system, be the place where we somehow quote, ``address those issues.'' I'll ask Mr. Charles your thoughts on that since you have some incredible experience of being on the losing side of that. Mr. Charles. I agree with Mr. Smith. There needs to be more mental health courts, and---- Senator Welch. Can you put your microphone a little closer? I can't quite hear you. Mr. Charles. Thank you. I said, I agree with Mr. Smith. There needs to be more mental health courts, and we do know that addiction and mental health sometimes play hand in hand. And oftentimes, because what we call the justice system is punitive in nature, it doesn't distinguish between a person that has an addiction or mental illness. All it sees is the crime that actually committed. Senator Welch. Thank you. Mr. Charles. And I've been in prison for 22 years, and I can clearly say that no mental health treatment behind bars is sufficient for some of these people that have addictions and mental illness problems. So I think that, of course I believe that people should be held accountable for the crimes they commit, but they need to receive treatment along with the sentence or treatment as opposed to the sentence and that's it. Senator Welch. Thank you. Mr. Charles. Because behind bars, they only get worse, not better. Senator Welch. And that gets us back to Senator Booker's concern about the staffing in order to be able to provide treatment or vocational training that we addressed. Mr. Smith, I want to thank you for the good work you did in your previous position in the last administration. One of the things that happened during the pandemic, as you know, is that there was a significant increase in the use of home confinement. That's become very controversial. And to some extent it's controversial because there is understandable apprehension as to whether certain offenders can be trusted and the public can be safe. To some extent, it's a view that people want more punitive action than, quote, ``home confinement.'' But my understanding is that home confinement, by and large was quite successful. What are your thoughts on that? Mr. J. Smith. Well, I think you may be alluding to the Cares Act---- Senator Welch. That's right. Mr. J. Smith . Which allowed a number of Federal individuals to spend time at home confinement. And it has been very successful. Former Attorney General Barr set great criteria of who qualified for that home confinement, and the recidivism rate for those individuals is less than 1 percent. It's extremely low. And we've saved a lot of money for the Federal prisons, which we can use those dollars to invest in the current infrastructure and implementation of the First Step Act. And so I think we should certainly continue down that road. And I also want to mention on the mental health piece, you know, I'm working with organization called Care Solace. I think it's a critical thing as a country that we need to invest into mental health infrastructure. That is a crime prevention piece because a lot of people who end up in the prison system is because of trauma backgrounds and lack of mental health and drug abuse. And our ability to kind of set up that infrastructure is critically important. So, working with local mayors to do that would be helpful. Senator Welch. Thank you very much. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman. Chair Durbin. Thank you, Senator Welch. Are you ready or-- Senator Butler? Senator Butler. Senator Butler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to my senior Senator for allowing me to engage the panel. Thank you all so much for the work that you have done. You did it before I arrived. And to be here to listen to the implementation on the success of the hard work of my colleagues is really inspiring for a new Senator like me who's excited and urgent about continuing the important work that has preceded me. Mr. Charles, if it's okay, I'd love to start with you. Thank you for sharing your story. And you received a lot of attention, and your case received a lot of attention from my famous constituents, Ms. Kardashian and others who helped raise the awareness of the country of not just your story as you've spoken, but to the stories of many others who have been in your shoes. After your release, you could have chosen to have a quiet life and none of us would've faulted you for that. Instead, you've decided that you're going to channel your experiences to speak out in support of criminal justice reform, and we all owe you a deep debt of gratitude for doing that. I noticed that you have joined local lawmakers and criminal justice reform advocates in Tennessee to discuss legislation that would automatically restore voting rights for people with felony convictions. And as we think about and are listening in this panel, both in recognition but also soliciting ideas for what is next, can you talk with us about the importance of restoring voting rights and what you have seen and heard, and why this is a place where you have invested your activism? Mr. Charles. I would say that whenever it comes to restoring voting rights, there's so many different collateral consequences due to incarceration, and one of them shouldn't be to lose your right to vote. I believe that right should be for everybody, especially those that are no longer in prison or on any type of supervision. But to turn around and say that this person is ineligible to be able to vote is to say that he can't be effective in his community, although he's trying to do everything that he positively can to be a part of the community. So I think, and also, you know, just restoring the dignity of an individual who has shown that he has substantially made changes in his own life, and he'd like to be part of the elected process. And there are representatives that have those same goals and interests that he share, but sometimes he's not able to vote for those individuals, just like in the State of Tennessee, and you talked about it in the restoration of the voting rights. There are some problems in regards to that because it's so complex. It makes a person jump through so many hurdles that even trying to get your voting rights restored starts like a task too complex for an individual, especially with limited knowledge of government, or how to achieve such a purpose to go through, you know, continue on and try to get their voting rights restored. So, I think that it needs to be simply, if you served your time, especially if you're not on any type of supervision anymore, and you are now contributing to society, then you need to be able to also vote on whatever elected official, whether local or national. Senator Butler. Thank you so much, and again, thank you for your activism and your continued commitment to this work. Mr. Smith--at the other Mr. Smith, I'd love to direct this my last question because of time to you. Thank you so much for being a part of today's conversation. You're showing so many young people who may believe that bipartisan work is impossible that, indeed, when we find common cause and we pursue it vigorously, that this is a model of government, and our democracy can truly work. And so your presence alone is so meaningful. Let me ask my question. You, on a recent panel, talked about the most ingredient being, quote, unquote, ``creating trust,'' and I think that that is so essential. You went on to say that, ``It's hard to navigate the contours of politics and people's differences, but it's even harder if there's no trust there to have a difficult conversation on what good looks like and what's a real win.'' Such a powerful comment. You did a lot of work, as been acknowledged by many of my colleagues, on helping to pass this incredibly important legislation. Let me ask you, how can trust, in your opinion, be restored to get to the next version of this great legislation? Mr. J. Smith. Sure. So I think the biggest thing is you have to, one, be very intentional of not letting the perfect be the enemy of the good. You have to understand that like--there are areas of common ground, and in achieving those areas of common ground, having the openness of discussion with people who may have differences of opinion. And so being intentional about trying to figure out where that bridge is, is a very important point. But then once you're trying to create that bridge is also being in a position to have a conversation of good faith, and that's why that trust piece is so important. You know, in many cases, even negotiating the First Step Act with a number of the Senators that are on this Committee, you know, the trust wasn't there on the front end. But the fact that we had something in common like a North Star that we all wanted to achieve, that allowed for us to have that conversation on good faith, and that good faith conversation allowed us to be very honest about the issue. And then figuring out how we can get to yes on both sides by learning about what we may have differences about, what are the red lines. And so it's extremely important. But it takes time and focus in order for us to get there and leadership, you know, having all the Senators' leadership, the President's leadership, allowed to facilitate that type of conversation. Senator Padilla . Thank you. Senator Hawley. Senator Hawley. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thanks to all of the witnesses for being here. I've been enjoying listening to your testimony as I've been back and forth to other hearings. But thank you, thank you all for being here. I'm going to be a bit of a dissenting voice today. I'll be honest with you, the passage of the First Step Act predates me in the Senate. This happened before I came, so I wasn't involved in any of the negotiations, and I didn't get to vote for it one way or another, and I certainly thank you for all the hard work, those of you who are involved with it that did. But I have to tell you, I've got major concerns with--with how it is playing out, and particularly when it comes to fentanyl. You know, my State, like I think every other State, sadly in the country, is in the midst of a major fentanyl epidemic. I mean, just a major fentanyl epidemic. It is the number one cause of death in the State of Missouri for young people who are over the age of 18--between 18 and 30-32, by some margin. And it's just getting worse. If you go and talk to any law enforcement official in the State of Missouri--and I had the privilege of working with them all over the State when I was the State's attorney general--they will tell you that our communities in Missouri, all of them, rural, urban, doesn't matter, are just awash in drugs, and fentanyl in particular, worse and worse and worse. So I've got serious, serious concerns about how this law is playing out with respect to fentanyl in particular. And I just want to put a few things on the record. You know, number one is we've got 190 people a day in the United States who die of fentanyl overdose. Another Senate Committee just heard testimony on this last week. That is, as one witness said at that Committee hearing, that's like a 737 crashing every single day. And again, that is happening in my State. And what the First Step Act has done with regard to drug offenses, including fentanyl, is the following: It limited the application of enhanced penalties for serious drug offenses. It dramatically cut back on the use of mandatory minimums for serious drug offenses. Number three, it drastically scaled back punishments for repeat drug offenders. And the U.S. Sentencing Commission that tracks this data, has found now that enhanced sentences for repeat offenders has gone down by more than 33 percent since the First Step Act was implemented. And all of that combines to effectively decrease big time the penalties for fentanyl. And then when you add in the fact that the current President's Sentencing Commission has gone even further--the Sentencing Commission, now tracking again, sentences for fentanyl--found that the average fentanyl trafficking sentence--so not possession, not possession--trafficking, the average trafficking sentence has gone down by more than 12 months over the last 5 years, the average sentence. And more than a third of fentanyl offenders receive a downward variance from their recommended sentence. Again, that's trafficking, that's not possession. So my concern is that, at a time when we've got record amounts of fentanyl coming over the border--27,000 pounds were seized last year; that's hundreds of millions of doses--the DEA estimates that 20,000 pounds of fentanyl would be enough for 800 million lethal doses. That's 860 percent more seized last year than in 2019. And that's just the amount that was interdicted. Who knows how much actually got through. At a time when we are just awash with this, the effect of the First Step Act, when it comes to fentanyl, has been to give traffickers and repeat offenders a pass. And I just think that that is a huge, huge problem. And I know in my State it is having hugely detrimental effects. So, you know, I know Mr. Smith--Charles Smith, you're a prosecutor. In fact, right now, you're the president of the National District Attorney's Association, I think. Is that correct? Mr. C. Smith. Yes, Senator. That is correct. Senator Hawley. Yes. Well, thank you for your tremendous work. And again, thank you all for being here. And thank you for your tremendous work in that connection. You're on the front lines, and believe me, I appreciate you. The people in Missouri appreciate our attorneys; we call them prosecutors, attorneys in Missouri. And just appreciate the tremendous work that you do and I salute your work, and I salute all of you on the panel. I just want to say for my part as a former prosecutor, I'm concerned by the position we're putting prosecutors in. I'm concerned, most of all though, by the position we're putting kids and families in by allowing repeat trafficking serious offenders to get lighter, lesser sentences. And I'm concerned about the effects this is having on safety in my State, on overdoses in my State. And I hope that there's something that we can do about this in the future. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Senator Padilla. Senator Whitehouse. Senator Whitehouse. Thanks, Chairman. And thanks to the witnesses for being here. I put a lot of work into the First Step Act, and so I'm keenly interested in seeing too its proper implementation. If you don't mind, Mr. Markle, I'll begin with you. It's my understanding that the recidivism rate for incarcerated people who have been released through the First Step Act's reentry program, is considerably lower than the general population. The numbers I've seen is about 12.5 percent recidivism versus 43 percent recidivism. So more than a three times reduction. And yet we've also heard that it's been hard for the Bureau of Prisons to implement this and to expand the programs as the bill expected because of staffing issues that have pulled people away from this particular work. Could you describe that situation to us so we've got it accurately from the BOP? Mr. Markle. Absolutely. And the Council of Prison Locals, we represent the correctional workers inside the facilities. And what ends up happening is we have our rosters in place every day that we need a certain percent or a certain number of correctional officers to safely run an institution. What happens is our staffing compliment has been reduced so far below what was appropriated by Congress. We're nearly 8,000 correctional officers short from what was appropriated through Congress. So what happens on a daily basis is we still have to maintain safety and security first. So they pull people out of the programming area, such as education, psychology, recreation, and case managers, counselors, the people that are hands-on every day to do the First Step Act. They're pulled from their primary positions, and they're placed in a position to be a correctional officer because we have to maintain a safe and secure institution first. Senator Whitehouse. So they get pulled off so they can go stand post in the facilities. Mr. Markle. Absolutely. You're working the position as a correctional officer. So, if I go in as a teacher, I could be stopped on my way in and they say, you're not going to education today. You're going to go to a housing unit. You're going to be a correctional officer. Therefore, the programs are just shut down. The inmates are idle. And we're reducing the total number of staff that we have in the institution each day. Senator Whitehouse. Well, thank you for your work. I've worked for a long time with the Brotherhood of Corrections Officers in Rhode Island, who say, quite accurately, that they work the toughest beat in the State. And I appreciate the work that you all do, and thank you for explaining that for us. Mr. Smith, Rhode Island has had a lot of success encouraging participation in programs that reduce recidivism, primarily at our State incarcerated facility, the ACI. And now with this program, we're seeing the Federal facilities beginning to catch up. At this point, more than 100,000 people have participated in these activities, and as I mentioned, the recidivism rate seems to be responding very powerfully. We got here because of a lot of support from law enforcement. And I want to take a moment to thank you for all of that and to ask you if there's anything that, from a prosecutor's perspective, you'd care to add. Is this working? Are there improvements? What would you like to see? Mr. C. Smith. Well, certainly it's working because the data says it's working. And that's what we as prosecutors try to do, is be strategic in our approach to public safety. We do it with the prosecution of crime. We determine which cases we're going to divert away from the criminal justice system. We have very vibrant diversion programs across the United States in our prosecutor offices, whether it's a juvenile diversion program, a drug diversion program, because once again, we're taking a look at the difference between good people making bad decisions and bad people making bad decisions. We're diverting the good people, which apparently is what you're doing in Rhode Island, and we're giving them opportunity. We're also identifying them for early release because they are rehabilitated and less likely to reoffend. And those people who are violent, who pose a threat to public safety and pose a threat to reoffend, we're keeping in jail for their full sentence. So, I would applaud Rhode Island. And I think Rhode Island is no different from the rest of the States in the United States and the prosecutors in that. We're just taking a look at how we can be better. A lot of people use the word reform. I just like improvement. I don't think we have to throw the baby out with the bath water. We're not trying to tear down everything that we've done. We're just trying to get better at it. And I applaud you, Senator, for your work on the First Step Act. And we're--at NDAA, we're more than happy to join forces with you and other law enforcement partners in the future. Senator Whitehouse. Much appreciated. I'll put another little Rhode Island flag in the ground here. Many, many years ago, we established a drug court quite early on that is now very established, very successful. We've also established a Veteran's Court, and we're working on a mental health court as well. And the last time I went to one of these was to visit the Veteran's Court. And I'll tell you, having been a prosecutor and having seen what it's like when an individual is marched out the back of the courtroom, shackled, and in the arms of the security folks, and the courtroom is quiet, but for the sounds of family members sobbing, it is a very different feeling than when you get to the Veteran's Court, graduations, they call them. And the families have come to cheer on the veteran, the veteran's community has come out enforced because there are really significant veteran's programs that can come to the aid of veterans and to get them on a really good path. There's a very impressive community of veterans who essentially staff the Veterans Court and interact with the individuals who've been charged and then sent to the Veteran's Court. And then there's very good tracking afterwards to make sure that they don't recidivate, they continue on the path that they've been shown through the Veteran's Court activities. And there's balloons sometimes, there's cake sometimes, their kids come dressed up, you know, girls in fancy dresses to come and see, like, dad graduate. And once you've seen that, it leaves an impression that's very hard to forget. We are doing good here, and I thank you. Senator Padilla. Thank you, Senator Whitehouse. I want to take a moment to also thank the witnesses for joining us today and for your testimony and participation. I think it's important for you to be here so we can highlight the successes of the First Step Act, which has made not just the public safer, but our criminal justice system more fair. And I appreciate Chairman Durbin scheduling this hearing for today. So, as we celebrate the achievement and the successes, it is also critical that we look forward to opportunities for continuing to improve the system as Mr. Smith referenced just a minute ago. And surely we do have plenty of work that remains to be done. Now, prior to the Step Act, only the Bureau of Prisons had the statutory authority to petition the court to resentence an offender. However, this authority was rarely used. From 2013 to 2017, the Bureau received 5,400 requests roughly for compassionate release and approved 6 percent. Under the First Step Act, incarcerated individuals may take it upon themselves in limited circumstances to petition for their own early release. My question is for Mr. Charles Smith: Can you describe the impact this policy change has had on incarcerated individuals, them knowing that they now have this option and opportunity? Mr. C. Smith. Once again we need to give incentive for people to change, to be rehabilitated. As Mr. Charles noted to my right, he was given a lot of those opportunities and took advantage of all those opportunities. So I keep saying we need to be strategic, but we do. We have to take a look at what policies promote someone to be rehabilitated and to not reoffend. And we need to get better at that. Under the old system, it was just, you know, ``Hey, I did my time. I'm coming up before the parole board. I didn't do anything wrong, so let me out.'' And once again, I think the FSA went a long way towards giving--incentivizing a lack of re-offending. And so once again, I just wanted to applaud all the Senators that had a hand in enacting this and passing it. And I think that, again, we can fine tune it. I heard you know the good Senator talk about some provisions in it that perhaps he believes are being abused. But once again, every piece of legislation is not perfect. Sometimes we just have to fine-tune it after we've did the first step and maybe the second step, we'll fine-tune it, make it better. Senator Padilla. Exactly. And so in that spirit, when it comes to compassionate release, do you believe it's being adequately and equitably used today? Or any suggestions on how to improve upon it and make it better? Mr. C. Smith. You know, I do have a couple--we do see abuse of the Compassionate Release Program. It's not rampant, but there are people that are trying to take advantage of it, and that's just going to happen with any population, inside of a prison or outside for that matter. But I do believe that there are circumstances that we as prosecutors have consented to the compassionate release, especially with the elderly, especially with the ill. But I guess we, again--I would want to see the data points. What is it that's being looked at in terms of compassionate release to assure that that those people truly that should be getting it, are getting it. Senator Padilla. Thank you. My next question's going to be for Mr. Charles, but let me preface it with the following. You know, when we discuss these rehabilitation programs and government efforts to create more just sentencing laws, we often talk about individuals who will directly benefit from these programs, these reforms, these improvements, if you will. But there are also substantial benefits when communities see the criminal justice system committed to prioritizing safety and carrying out fair and equal justice. Mr. Charles how do you believe fair sentencing practices impact communities, not just the individual? Mr. Charles. Thank you, sir. I definitely do. The fact that--I'm just going to go back to the war against drugs, when there were receiving 100-to-1 sentences for crack cocaine versus powder cocaine. A lot of communities of color--I don't just want to say that that disparity is not justified, but it's also racially disparate, and a lot of communities of color that have been ravaged due to drug activity that have taken place in those communities, and their loved ones have been sentenced to sentences anywhere from 30 years to life, when people who sold the same drug, but not in other words, the type of drug, ended up receiving a lesser sentence than their loved ones. So a lot of times people see that and they be like, well, the justice system isn't fair. When I was sentenced, I didn't necessarily believe that the justice system was fair. I understood that I should be held accountable for breaking the law, and I was, and I received a 35-year sentence based on what the law was at that time. But as I review my sentence and reflect on the fact that someone that just sold powder cocaine would've received a sentence 15 years less than what I received, then that's not fair. And communities of color have seen this, and they have seen heavy police. Now, we believe in policing and preventing crime, but communities of color oftentimes are heavily policed. And whenever the law that they're being sentenced to is not necessarily favorable to people in these conditions or people of color, then that sets a stage for them to believe that the law isn't fair. So I would say anytime that we can reform laws that are not fair to make them more fair or repeal those laws, then it's always going to be better for the community. And community is going to be satisfied as far as their loved ones returning home and feel within themselves that the justice system is trying to be fairer. Senator Padilla. That does impact the fundamental public confidence in the justice system which is important. Welcome Senator Klobuchar, you're up next. Senator Klobuchar. Thank you very much, Senator Padilla. Thank you, all of you that you're here to talk about our progress after 5 years. I was honored to be here and support the First Step Act and work on some of the provisions. So, this is a really big deal, and I want to start with you, Mr. Smith. I was former member of the District Attorney's Association, as you know, and I also know that supportive prosecutors across the country, not every single one of them, but your association was really important in getting this done. And talk about why that was? As prosecutors, I think that kind of jars people sometimes, but one of the things I would always argue is, you know, we're not like a business in every way in a prosecutor's office, in that we don't want to see repeat customers. We want people to be able to go on with their lives like Mr. Charles has done. And could you just talk about the importance of the reduction of recidivism? Mr. C. Smith. Senator, I referenced before about crime fighting, and I think that the general public sometimes thinks these measures are soft on crime, and they're not. This is just a different form of crime fighting. Crime prevention is just as important to protecting the public, as taking the person who committed the crime off the street. And so we were in support of the First Step Act because it was common sense, it was practical stuff that targeted low risk offenders through proven data points, and the numbers bear out. You guys did a great job. I mean, look at the recidivism rate. 46 percent. I mean, that's incredible. There's no one that can argue with those numbers. Senator Klobuchar. Right. So you've got the--it was the Justice Department numbers that nearly 30,000 who were released under the First Step Act, only 12 percent recidivated compared to the overall Bureau of Prison recidivism rate, which is more than 46 percent. That's correct. Right? Mr. C. Smith. Yes, correct. So, once again, we as prosecutors take our oath to protect the public very seriously. But I think sometimes we just get a bad rap. I mean, it seems like half of the people think we're too tough on people, we're putting everybody in crime. Then you got the other half of the people that are saying, ``Oh, you know, you're too soft. You're letting people out too early.'' But we thought at NDAA, the First Step Act struck a great balance. And it proofed out with the data. Senator Klobuchar. Yes. Mr. Charles thank you so much for being here and sharing your experience. For years, Senator Cornyn and I led the One Stop Shop Community Reentry Program Act to help former inmates reintegrate into their communities by creating resource centers that help them find jobs, housing, mental health services, substance abuse treatment. For years before I was a DA, I actually was involved in a volunteer program called Amicus and visited a woman at the women's prison for nearly 10 years. And I just saw this need when you're there every single month and get to know someone for what the plan is when they get out. So, could you talk about, as someone who works to get inmates ready to reintegrate into their communities, can you talk about the importance of ensuring that people continue to have access to recidivism reduction programs when they're released from custody? Mr. Charles. Thank you, Senator. And I also want to thank you for your work in reentry. Having reentry resources available once a person is released is vital to them being successful. I myself ran into hurdles when I was released. I couldn't find housing, and because I couldn't find housing, my stability was weakened. But thankfully I had a friend who allowed me to stay with them for about four months until I was able to get my footing. So, being able to have these reentry resources available for those that are returning to society allows them to have the support so that they can be productive, so that they can go on and be successful in their lives and in the lives of their family members. So, without those things, including the programs that are now placed in the prison because of the First Step Act, allows those people to be able to learn vocational educational skills and trades so that once they are released, they will be able to find employment. So, those hurdles that most people run into once they're released from incarceration is housing, is employment, is transportation. So if the resources are available or organizations that are available that provide those things, that person is less likely to recidivate. Senator Klobuchar. Exactly. Last question, Mr. Markle. You served special education teacher for the Bureau of Prisons-- thank you for that--for over 20 years. And talk about--I know there's some waitlists as we look at these numbers, which I just discussed with Mr. Smith that are so positive--but talk about how waitlists to access First Step Act educational programs could negatively impact the goals of the Act and what Congress can do to improve the implementation. I know you talked a little bit about these programs with Senator Booker, but if you could talk about specifically waitlists. Mr. Markle. Thank you, Senator. With the implementation of the First Step Act, obviously education and programming and everything that we do became very popular. So obviously inmates wanted to be involved in programs that sometimes had been forgotten. We've always done GED and Special Education, but it's now emphasized by the First Step Act. So we can fill what we can fill with the amount of teachers that we have, the amount of staff and resources we have, we fill the classes up. When we're able to be in the actual classrooms teaching and not being pulled to different assignments, we do our best to move through those. So inmates are on waiting lists. Some additions were made to where they are receiving credit for being on waitlist, but that's a problem too, because an inmate is not receiving the actual programming or the benefits from the First Step Act, but they're still earning the credits. So the biggest problem is it's just we need the resources and the staff to continue push forward to eliminate the waitlist and actually get people into classrooms so they can receive the benefits from the First Step Act. Senator Klobuchar. Thank you. And thank you as well, Mr. Smith, for your work. I have to head out, but I'll send you a question in writing. I'm sure it'll be very exciting. So thank you. Senator Padilla. Thank you. And that concludes questions from the Members of the Committee for today. On behalf of Chairman Durbin, I want to express again our appreciation for all the witnesses appearing before the Committee today. As we discussed, the landmark First Step Act reimagined rehabilitation and public safety in our criminal justice system. But there's more work to be done. Congress can and should take more steps to reduce recidivism and direct resources to address the root causes of criminality. I hope this hearing has highlighted what Congress can accomplish when we're willing to tackle difficult problems and work together to find solutions. The hearing record will remain open for 1 week for submission of materials for the record, including follow-up questions from Members of the Senate. We'd ask that you all reply as quickly as you can. Senator Padilla. And with that, our hearing is adjourned.   A P P E N D I X Submitted by Senator Cornyn: National Association of Assistant U.S. Attorneys................. 62  