  . PRESIDENTIAL POWER TO SECURE THE BORDER ======================================================================= HEARING BEFORE THE SUBCOMMITTEE ON IMMIGRATION INTEGRITY, SECURITY, AND ENFORCEMENT COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS SECOND SESSION __________ THURSDAY, MARCH 7, 2024 __________ Serial No. 118-66 __________ Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary  Available via: http://judiciary.house.gov __________ U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE 55-072 WASHINGTON : 2024 ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY JIM JORDAN, Ohio, Chair DARRELL ISSA, California JERROLD NADLER, New York, Ranking KEN BUCK, Colorado Member MATT GAETZ, Florida ZOE LOFGREN, California ANDY BIGGS, Arizona SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas TOM McCLINTOCK, California STEVE COHEN, Tennessee TOM TIFFANY, Wisconsin HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr., THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky Georgia CHIP ROY, Texas ADAM SCHIFF, California DAN BISHOP, North Carolina J. LUIS CORREA, California VICTORIA SPARTZ, Indiana ERIC SWALWELL, California SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin TED LIEU, California CLIFF BENTZ, Oregon PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington BEN CLINE, Virginia MARY GAY SCANLON, Pennsylvania KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota JOE NEGUSE, Colorado LANCE GOODEN, Texas LUCY McBATH, Georgia JEFF VAN DREW, New Jersey MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania TROY NEHLS, Texas VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas BARRY MOORE, Alabama DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina KEVIN KILEY, California CORI BUSH, Missouri HARRIET HAGEMAN, Wyoming GLENN IVEY, Maryland NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas BECCA BALINT, Vermont LAUREL LEE, Florida WESLEY HUNT, Texas RUSSELL FRY, South Carolina ------ SUBCOMMITTEE ON IMMIGRATION INTEGRITY, SECURITY, AND ENFORCEMENT TOM McCLINTOCK, California, Chair KEN BUCK, Colorado PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington, ANDY BIGGS, Arizona Ranking Member TOM TIFFANY, Wisconsin ZOE LOFGREN, California CHIP ROY, Texas J. LUIS CORREA, California VICTORIA SPARTZ, Indiana VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas JEFF VAN DREW, New Jersey SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas TROY NEHLS, Texas DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina BARRY MOORE, Alabama ERIC SWALWELL, California WESLEY HUNT, Texas Vacancy CHRISTOPHER HIXON, Majority Staff Director AARON HILLER, Minority Staff Director & Chief of Staff C O N T E N T S ---------- Thursday, March 7, 2024 Page OPENING STATEMENTS The Honorable Tom McClintock, Chair of the Subcommittee on Immigration Integrity, Security, and Enforcement from the State of California.................................................. 1 The Honorable Pramila Jayapal, Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on Immigration Integrity, Security, and Enforcement from the State of Washington............................................ 3 The Honorable Jerrold Nadler, Ranking Member of the Committee on the Judiciary from the State of New York....................... 5 The Honorable Jim Jordan, Chair of the Committee on the Judiciary from the State of Ohio......................................... 7 WITNESSES Andrew R. Arthur, Resident Fellow in Law and Policy, Center for Immigration Studies Oral Testimony................................................. 8 Prepared Testimony............................................. 11 Thomas D. Homan, Retired Director, United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE); Visiting Fellow, The Heritage Foundation Oral Testimony................................................. 72 Prepared Testimony............................................. 74 Aaron Reichlin-Melnick, Policy Director, American Immigration Council Oral Testimony................................................. 80 Prepared Testimony............................................. 82 Gene P. Hamilton, Executive Director, Executive Vice President, and General Counsel, America First Legal Foundation Oral Testimony................................................. 100 Prepared Testimony............................................. 102 LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC. SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING All materials submitted for the record by the Subcommittee on Immigration Integrity, Security, and Enforcement are listed below.......................................................... 130 Materials submitted by the Honorable Pramila Jayapal, Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on Immigration Integrity, Security, and Enforcement from the State of Washington, for the record A report entitled, ``Review of the Department of Justice's Planning and Implementation of Its Zero Tolerance Policy and Its Coordination with the Departments of Homeland Security and Health and Human Services,'' Jan. 2021, Evaluation and Inspections Division, Office of the Inspector General, Department of Justice A memo from Gene P. Hamilton, Executive Director, Executive Vice President, and General Counsel, America First Legal Foundation A report entitled, ``The Fiscal Impact of Refugees and Asylees at the Federal, State, and Local Levels From 2005 to 2019,'' Feb. 2024, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services A report entitled, ``The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2024 to 2034,'' Feb. 2024, Nonpartican Analysis for the U.S. Congress, Congressional Budget Office An article entitled, ``Where the `Migrant Protection Protocols' Stand, Four Years After Going Into Effect,'' Mar. 24, 2023, Immigration Impact A letter to the Honorable Jerrold Nadler, Chair of the Committee on the Judiciary from the State of New York, Aug. 22, 2023, regarding the amicus brief filed before the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit in Missouri v. Biden, from the Honorable Jerrold Nadler, Ranking Member, submitted by the Honorable Jerrold Nadler, Ranking Member of the Committee on the Judiciary from the State of New York, for the record Materials from the Honorable Veronica Escobar, a Member of the Subcommittee on Immigration Integrity, Security, and Enforcement from the State of Texas, for the record An article entitled, ``Trump urges House GOP to fix immigration system, expresses no strong preference on rival bills amid uproar over family separations,'' Jun. 20, 2018, The Washington Post An article entitled, ``POLITICO Playbook PM: Trump sends letter to the Hill,'' Jan. 4, 2019, Politico A letter to Congress asking Congress to take action from the former President Trump, The White House, Jan. 4, 2019 An article entitled, ``Border Crackdowns Won't Solve America's Immigration Crisis,'' Mar. 1, 2024, The Wall Street Journal, submitted by the Honorable Deborah Ross, a Member of the Subcommittee on Immigration Integrity, Security, and Enforcement from the State of North Carolina, for the record QUESTIONS AND RESPONSES FOR THE RECORD Question to Gene P. Hamilton, Executive Director, Executive Vice President, and General Counsel, America First Legal Foundation, submitted by the Honorable Tom McClintock, a Member of the Subcommittee on Immigration Integrity, Security, and Enforcement from the State of California, for the record No response received at the time of publication PRESIDENTIAL POWER TO SECURE THE BORDER ---------- Thursday, March 7, 2024 House of Representatives Subcommittee on Immigration Integrity, Security, and Enforcement Committee on the Judiciary Washington, DC The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:52 p.m., in Room 2141, Rayburn House Office Building, the Hon. Tom McClintock  presiding. Members present: Representatives McClintock, Jordan, Biggs, Tiffany, Roy, Van Drew, Moore, Hunt, Jayapal, Nadler, Lofgren, Correa, Escobar, and Ross. Mr. McClintock. The Subcommittee will come to order. Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a recess at any time. I want to welcome you all to today's hearing on Presidential power to secure the border. I want to thank all of you for your patience. We were delayed by votes. That's the bad news. The good news is we won't be interrupted by votes during the hearing. I think I will begin by recognizing myself for five minutes. During a trip to the Yuma sector last year, we met with a group of Border Patrol Agents. I said, ``Look, Congress writes the laws. We can't enforce them. So, what laws do you need us to write?'' To a person, these line agents all said, ``We don't need new laws. We need to enforce the laws we already have.'' At Eagle Pass in January, the head of the Border Patrol said, I'm standing in front of an open fire hydrant with a bucket. I don't need more buckets. I need someone to turn off the hydrant. Donald Trump did exactly that. He enforced our existing laws. He used Title 42 to stop millions of illegal crossings. He implemented the Remain in Mexico policy, requiring asylum claimants to remain in Mexico until their cases were heard. He enforced court-ordered deportations. It worked. Illegal border crossings fell to a 46-year low. The laws didn't change, but the administration changed. On Biden's first day in office, he ended the Remain in Mexico policy. He ordered ICE to stop enforcing court-ordered deportations, and he ordered all construction on the border wall to cease. Since that day, he has deliberately released into the country more than 4.5 million illegal aliens and allowed an additional 1.8 million to evade apprehension by the Border Patrol, while it was overwhelmed by this influx. That is the combined population the size of the State of Missouri, our 18th largest State with eight Congressional Districts. I said the laws didn't change. The enforcement of those laws changed. This crisis should be a surprise to no one. This is exactly what the Democrats promised to do. This is exactly what they have done, and this is exactly what they have defended every day for the last three years. Today, we will hear from officials who served in the Trump Administration who will describe how the immigration laws were enforced with an eye toward border, interior, and national security. They will describe how enforcement has changed so radically under the Biden Administration. Now, we can pass laws that make it harder to assert phony asylum claims; prevent future Presidents from flouting the law, as this one has done; finish the border wall that Border Patrol Agents tell us is a critical tool for them, and we can put teeth into laws protecting American workers from the flood of cheap illegal labor the Democrats have unleashed. In fact, the House did that; it did all of that by passing H.R. 2. Senate Democrats refused to take it up. Instead, they support a bill that the Senate can't pass. That bill would make it impossible for a future President to secure the border by requiring release of 4,000 such claimants a day into the country before the President can take any action. Current law requires the detention of all such claimants. The Senate bill would require the release of all such claimants, while tapping American taxpayers for another $1.6 billion on top of the billions we are already paying to support them, and to encourage millions more still to come. Under the Senate bill, even when an administration can finally use the weak authority to shut down the border, the border is never really shut down, as the bill requires at least 1,400 illegal aliens a day to be processed into the country at points of entry--at a minimum. The American people are coming to well understand the implications to the safety, security, and prosperity of our Nation. Our public schools are being overwhelmed by illegals requiring education. New York estimates the cost to be a billion dollars a year so far. Well, that's the same as a billion-dollar cut to the New York City schools for New Yorkers. Our homeless shelters and social programs have been overwhelmed to the point that services are now being cut or denied for Americans. Fatal drugs, like fentanyl, are now flooding our streets. Entirely preventable and tragic violent crimes are reported daily. Violent criminal gangs and international crime cartels are now operating in our cities, and sanctuary policies protect these criminals from deportation, and in many cases even from detention. Here's the fine point of the matter: The President has the authority to stop this. Trump did; Biden did not. Far worse, Biden's policies have actively aided and abetted this catastrophe. Congress can't fix this by laws that won't be passed--or by bills that won't be passed or laws that won't be enforced when they are passed. Ultimately, this crisis can only be fixed by replacing this administration with one that is determined to secure our borders, protect our people, and uphold the rule of law. That can only be done by the American people at the ballot box. Today, our witnesses include some of the architects of the successful Trump Administration immigration policies, and I would urge my colleagues to listen attentively to what these experts have to say. The policies they helped put in place worked to reduce illegal immigration and to secure the border. President Biden's policies do the exact opposite, and we can see that so clearly today. With that, I will yield back, and now recognize the Ranking Member, Ms. Jayapal, for an opening statement. Ms. Jayapal. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I welcome all our witnesses. Mr. Chair, it feels like we've been stuck in a time loop since this Congress began. House Republicans struggle, and often fail, to do the most basic aspects of governing, while this Committee continues to hold the same hearings on the border. Today seems no different. Today's hearing appears to be an attempt by my Republican colleagues to justify their inability and lack of desire to act in a bipartisan fashion to address the border and fix the broken immigration system. I think it is important for us to take a step back and remember how we got here. Earlier in this Congress, Republicans passed their cruel, inhumane, and unworkable border bill, H.R. 2, through the House. After its passage, all we heard from our colleagues was that H.R. 2 could secure the border. That bill has since failed twice to pass the U.S. Senate, rejected on a bipartisan basis. Then, after insisting for months that the only way to address the border was through harsh border security legislation, former President Trump instructed Republicans to dismiss out of hand a bipartisan border bill that Minority Leader Mitch McConnell calls, ``the strongest and toughest border bill in 30 years,'' and that was written by the second most conservative Senator in the U.S. Senates, James Lankford. Immediately, Speaker Johnson and others began to claim the President doesn't need this legislation; President Biden can secure the border through Executive actions; there's no bills needed at all. Let us be clear. The American people are not stupid. They know that Republicans do not actually want to solve or address the situation at the border because Republicans have said that. Donald Trump has said that over and over again: Let's not do anything to solve the problem at the border. Let's keep it out there as an issue for the election. As we have heard from multiple Republicans, including on this Subcommittee, they would rather weaponize the border as a political issue for this election year. Today's hearing will not bring my colleagues the answers that they are looking for because the reality is, no, the President cannot, quote, ``close the border.'' Speaker Johnson and others have said that all the President needs to do is to use Section 212(f) of the Immigration and Nationality Act to, quote, ``shut down the border to all border crossers.'' However, what they seem to forget is that President Trump tried to do exactly that in November 2018, and he was stopped by our courts. Even the Supreme Court refused to intervene and lift the lower court injunction. Whether the President can technically close the border or not actually misses the point. The reality is attempts to use cruel and inhumane deterrence and enforcement alone, which is what President Trump and other administrations have tried to do, simply does not work. Let's think back. When President Trump implemented the Remain in Mexico program early in 2019, did people stop crossing the border? No. No, they did not. In fact, that summer we saw some of the highest levels of immigration of the entire Trump Administration. We saw the same thing with the use of Title 42. When President Trump used Title 42 to turn back all border crossers, encounters between the ports of entry shot up, not down. They went up. Remember, Title 42 was also a boost to cartels. Knowing that they would be turned away under Title 42, migrants were forced to rely on cartels to try to get smuggled into the country between points of entry. Cartels actually offered packages for migrants to make multiple attempts at crossing. One migrant was apprehended over 40 times--just one alone. Human smugglers told reporters that Title 42 saved them money-- with some going as far as to say, quote, ``It's great for us.'' This is the cartels we're talking about. Let me be very clear that the vast majority of these people that are coming across the border, migrants, do not want to engage with cartels. They want to follow a legal process, and they do follow a legal process when we provide workable ways for people to seek entry and refuge. I have said to all Congress, the best way to help secure the border is to expand lawful pathways and adequately fund the immigration system. We have not updated the legal immigration system in this country in over 30 years. The more broken the legal immigration system is, the more people will try to come to the border as the only means of entry. We should be having hearings on this Committee about how we can expand lawful immigration to the United States and how it benefits the United States. Just last month, the Congressional Budget Office said that, Because of the recent increase in immigration, over the next 10 years, the economy is going to grow by $7 trillion and revenues will increase by a trillion dollars. This was further backed up by another new government study by the Department of Health and Human Services, which shows that refugees and asylees have a net positive impact of $124 billion over 10 years. I ask for unanimous consent, Mr. Chair, to enter those studies into the record. Mr. McClintock. Without objection. Ms. Jayapal. Unfortunately, the Republicans have time and time again blocked additional funding and seem to oppose more legal immigration. They are not interested in real solutions, and that is extremely unfortunate for the American people, for all of us across the country who want to get to a real solution. I look forward to hearing from all our witnesses and the perspectives they bring on this issue. I yield back the balance of my time. Mr. McClintock. Thank you very much. I will next recognize the Ranking Member of the House Judiciary Committee, Mr. Nadler, for his opening statement. Mr. Nadler. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, no President has ever had the ability to fully stop unlawful crossings. The notion that the President has all the authority, not to mention the resources, that he needs to solve all the issues at the border with the stroke of his pen is a fantasy. It has been dreamed up by a Republican Party desperate to justify their rejection of a bipartisan Senate deal to address border security. They are embarrassed to admit that the real reason they abandoned the deal was because Donald Trump told them to. At the behest of Donald Trump, Republicans cannot take yes for an answer. They are tying themselves in knots, not willing to do anything to actually address the border or to fix our immigration system, because they want to keep immigration alive as a campaign issue. So now, they have changed course. Despite spending the last year claiming that the only solution to the border crisis was their absurd, unworkable messaging bill, H.R. 2, a bill that got only 32 votes in the Senate last week, House Republicans now tell us that the President has had the authority to fix the border all along; he just won't use it. What a joke. What pure hogwash. Let's take a trip down memory lane. We have not meaningfully updated our immigration system in 30 years. Congress has tried multiple times to enact comprehensive immigration reform. The Senate last tried in 2013. House Republicans have stood in the way of progress at every turn. House Republicans have also refused to provide additional resources and personnel for the border. In 2021, all but six House Republicans voted against the bipartisan infrastructure deal, which provided additional funding to points of entry to combat smuggling of people and drugs. By the way, we know that most fentanyl, almost all the fentanyl comes in hidden in trucks that pass through points of entry. The way to stop the importation of fentanyl and the poisoning of our people is not to worry about individual migrants; it is to increase the inspection facilities at the points of entry, but Republicans don't want to do that. All but two current House Republicans voted against providing robust funding for border security operations in the Fiscal Year 2023 appropriations omnibus legislation. That bill provided more than $17 billion to Customs and Border Protection, including funding for an additional 300 Border Patrol Agents. The omnibus also included $16 million to hire 125 CBP officers and $70 million for nonintrusive inspection technology to detect narcotics, like fen- tanyl, and firearms at points of entry. Then, in October 2023, President Biden asked Congress for additional funding to support CBP in security our points of entry from drugs, to create a more orderly process at our border, and to hire more asylum officers and judges, so cases could be heard in weeks, not years. He also proposed providing the support that Ukraine and other allies around the world desperately need--support, I might add, that does not just go abroad, but that runs through manufacturing towns across America. Again, at Donald Trump's direction, Republicans said no. Instead, they made what they thought would be an impossible demand: That they would not provide aid to Ukraine or fund the President's border request unless policy measures to secure the border were attached. Then, to their surprise and horror, Democrats actually reached across the aisle to work with them toward a bipartisan solution, throwing a wrench into their plans. Republicans want to believe that Democrats are the characters they paint us as on Fox and Newsmax. What they fail to understand is that all we want is a government that works for the people. That is why we fight for a humane immigration system, an expanded social safety net, and protections for women, people of color, and the LGBTQIA+ people. Most importantly, they fail to understand that we govern responsibly. We don't allow ourselves to fall into chaos that does nothing but weaken us on the world stage. So, House Republicans were caught flatfooted when Senate Democrats worked with the minority, with the Republicans, to craft a bill to meet their border demands--a bill that Minority Leader Mitch McConnell called, ``the strongest border bill in 30 years,'' and that Senators Thune and Graham said, ``contains measures that could never be passed in the Republican-led Senate.'' Even this bill, which contained provisions that I and many of my colleagues on this side of the aisle found deeply troubling, was not enough for House Republicans. They bowed to the demands of Donald Trump that they preserve the immigration issue for his campaign, and they killed the bill before it even got off the ground. As ever, they could not bring themselves to take yes for an answer. So now, in a desperate attempt to save face, they are switching tactics. Despite the months they spent saying that H.R. 2 was the silver bullet, and that legislation was absolutely necessary to fix the border, now they say that the system had a magic silver bullet in it all along. Speaker Johnson and the chaos caucus are insist- ing that the President can simply use Section 212(f) of the Immigration and Nationality Act to prevent immigrants from crossing the border. If this sounds like a familiar argument to you, it should. That is because President Trump tried to do exactly that in 2018, and he was immediately shot down by the courts. The President does not have the authority to unilaterally shut down the border. Neither our laws, nor our democracy, allow such a power. To pretend otherwise is absurd. Congress must work together to provide the legal tools and the resources necessary to address the border crisis. I know that there are Democrats willing to put in the hard work, but, so far, House Republicans have proven that Democrats have no partner in this effort. So, while I look forward to hearing from our witnesses, we already know the answer to the questions the majority is posing today. More importantly, we know exactly why they are opposing it. MAGA Republicans want to talk about the border, but they don't want to do anything about it--for the most partisan, cynical reasons. I yield back. Mr. McClintock. The gentleman yields back. The Chair is now pleased to recognize the Chair of the House Judiciary Committee, Mr. Jordan. Chair Jordan. I thank the Chair. I won't make a statement. I want to get on with the testimony here from these fine witnesses. I want to mostly thank the Chair for putting this hearing together on this critical subject that the American people care deeply about. With that, I would yield back. Mr. McClintock. Thank you. Well, then, we will now go to our panel of witnesses. I want to again thank them for their patience for the delay. The witnesses we have today are Mr. Art Arthur. He is the resident fellow in law and policy for the Center for Immigration Studies. Prior to that, Mr. Arthur served in the Immigration and Naturalization Service General Counsel's Office; as a Counsel in the House Judiciary Committee; as an Immigration Judge, and Staff Director for the National Security Subcommittee for the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform. He earned a JD from George Washington School of Law and a bachelor's at the University of Virginia. Mr. Tom Homan is the former Acting Director of U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement during the Trump Administration; serving in senior roles at ICE during several administrations. He has 34 years of experience in Federal immigration enforcement, and he currently serves as a visiting fellow at the Heritage Foundation. Next, Mr. Aaron Reichlin-Melnick. Mr. Reichlin-Melnick is currently the Policy Director at the American Immigration Council, where he has also served as the policy counsel and a staff attorney. Prior to that, he was justice fellow on the Immigrant Justice Corps and the Legal Aid Society in New York. He earned a JD at Georgetown University Law Center and a bachelor's at Brandeis University. He is here at the invitation of the minority. Finally, we have Mr. Gene Hamilton. Mr. Hamilton serves as the Vice President and General Counsel of American First Legal. Prior to that, Mr. Hamilton served as Counselor to the Attorney General at the Department of Justice during the Trump Administration. He previously served as Senior Counselor to the Secretary of Homeland Security and as General Counsel to the Senator on the Senate Judiciary Committee. Mr. Hamilton earned his JD from the Washington and Lee School of Law and his bachelor's from the University of Georgia. I would like to welcome these witnesses today; thank them again for appearing. We will begin by swearing you in. Would you please rise and raise your right hand? Do you swear or affirm, under penalty of perjury, that the testimony you're about to give is true and correct to the best of your knowledge, information, and belief, so help you God? Let the record show the witnesses have answered in the affirmative. Please know that your written testimony will be entered into the record in its entirety. Accordingly, we would ask that you summarize your testimony in five minutes. We will begin with Mr. Arthur. STATEMENT OF ANDREW R. ARTHUR Mr. Arthur. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I don't want to correct the Chair, but I never actually served in the Trump Administration. I served from the George H.W. Bush Administration through Barack Obama, President Barack Obama. Chair McClintock, Ranking Member Jayapal, and the Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for inviting me here today. The topic is timely, as we are in the midst of an unprecedented border crisis. Every month, tens of thousands are apprehended at the Southwest border, even while more than 43,000 others without visas schedule appointments at the border ports. The majority are released, which, as a Federal judge found last March, is driving the border crisis. That doesn't count tens of thousands who evade agents monthly, so-called gotaways. Their entries are imposing billions in fiscal costs on States and localities for housing, healthcare, education, and other expenses. As the 2024 DHS Homeland Security Threat Assessment has explained, this crisis has created a vulnerability, quote, ``terrorists and criminal actors may exploit.'' The Constitution and the Immigration and Nationality Act provide the President with numerous and sufficient authorities to bring security to the border, which I discuss at length in my written testimony. Key, however, is detention, which has been mandated for aliens at the ports since 1903, and for unlawful entrants since 1996. Unlike preceding administrations, the current one has largely failed to comply with those statutory mandates; instead, ending family detention entirely, while asking Congress for fewer detention beds in succeeding budgets and claiming they'll be sufficient to comply with DHS's statutory mandates. They're not. The DHS Secretary, under 8 United States Code Section 1368(b), is supposed to tell this Committee every six months how many beds the Department needs to meet those requirements. If it has sent you those semiannual reports, it's news to me. Congress must fund that detention and the resources needed to adjudicate those aliens' cases and removals. That will be costly at first, but those costs will quickly drop as entries drop. As long as illegal entrants know they'll be released to live and work here indefinitely pending the adjudication of their asylum claims, they'll continue to come. Detention also allows DHS to screen out those with valid asylum claims and remove the rest, as importantly, it would shift the cost of caring for those migrants from the cities and States to the Federal Government, where it belongs. Such detention must be humane and provide those held sustenance, medical care, and education. As a judge, I had jurisdiction over a family center that exceeded all those standards. A 2015 District Court order in Flores v. Lynch, however, prevents DHS from housing families for more than 20 days. I respectfully disagree with the conclusions therein. In 2019, a Federal bipartisan panel concluded that the children in those families were traumatized by the illegal journey here and that parents and children alike are particularly vulnerable to criminal predation. The panel found that Flores had exacerbated the pull factors drawing those migrants to this country and called on Congress to reverse it by legislation. Failing that, it asked DHS to issue regulations replacing that order and allowing for family migrant detention. The last administration did so, only to have those regulations enjoined. The incoming Biden Administration failed to seek Supreme Court review. It has also failed to issue regulations of its own. More than 1.8 million family aliens have been apprehended at the Southwest border since February 2021. The administration could also use diplomacy to encourage its regional partners to secure their own borders, which would deter new arrivals from abroad. The U.S. accounts for 25 percent of global GDP and it is Mexico's most important trading partner. Reports suggest that the Biden Administration has used its diplomatic power to encourage greater enforcement in that country, but more can be done. Last, the administration did attempt to restrict asylum for aliens entering illegally, and until recently, was fighting court challenges against it. Last month, however, DOJ asked the courts to pause those cases, pending settlement negotiations. I commend you the February 21 order in one of those cases, East Bay Sanctuary Covenant v. Biden, and, in particular, the dissent by Judge Lawrence VanDyke. I take no position on the claims that Judge VanDyke makes, but, in any event, it's incumbent on DOJ and DHS to coordinate any administrative actions securing the border to ensure challenges will be litigated forcefully and to a conclusion. In September 1994, Barbara Jordan, former Member of this Committee and Chair of the U.S. Committee on Immigration and Reform, appeared before this Subcommittee and warned that, quote, If we cannot control illegal immigration, we cannot sustain our national interest in legal immigration. Look at the polling; talk to your constituents, and you'll see that's what's happening today. That's bad because America needs immigration, albeit on the terms Congress has established. The administration and this Congress can and must do more to secure the border; the stakes are too high not to. Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.      All materials submitted for the record by Members of the Subcommittee on Immigration Integrity, Security, and Enforcement can be found at the following links: https:// docs.house.gov/ Committee/Calendar/ByEvent.aspx?EventID=116925. 