TAKING A SERIOUS LOOK AT THE RETIREMENT CRISIS IN AMERICA: WHAT CAN WE DO TO EXPAND DEFINED BENEFIT PENSION PLANS FOR WORKERS? ======================================================================= HEARING OF THE COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, EDUCATION, LABOR, AND PENSIONS UNITED STATES SENATE ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS SECOND SESSION ON EXAMINING THE RETIREMENT CRISIS IN AMERICA, FOCUSING ON EXPANDING DEFINED BENEFIT PENSION PLANS FOR WORKERS __________ FEBRUARY 28, 2024 __________ Printed for the use of the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions  Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov _______ U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE 55-850 PDF WASHINGTON : 2024 BERNIE SANDERS (I), Vermont, Chairman PATTY MURRAY, Washington BILL CASSIDY, M.D., Louisiana, ROBERT P. CASEY, JR., Pennsylvania Ranking Member TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin RAND PAUL, Kentucky CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut SUSAN M. COLLINS, Maine TIM KAINE, Virginia LISA MURKOWSKI, Alaska MAGGIE HASSAN, New Hampshire MIKE BRAUN, Indiana TINA SMITH, Minnesota ROGER MARSHALL, M.D., Kansas BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico MITT ROMNEY, Utah JOHN HICKENLOOPER, Colorado TOMMY TUBERVILLE, Alabama ED MARKEY, Massachusetts MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma TED BUDD, North Carolina Warren Gunnels, Majority Staff Director Bill Dauster, Majority Deputy Staff Director Amanda Lincoln, Minority Staff Director Danielle Janowski, Minority Deputy Staff Director C O N T E N T S ---------- STATEMENTS WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 28, 2024 Page Committee Members Sanders, Hon. Bernie, Chairman, Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions, Opening statement......................... 1 Cassidy, Hon. Bill, Ranking Member, U.S. Senator from the State of Louisiana, Opening statement................................ 3 Witnesses Schambers, Sara, UAW Member, Local 182, Ford Livonia Transmission, Livonia, MI...................................... 6 Prepared statement........................................... 8 Summary statement............................................ 15 Ghilarducci, Teresa, Irene and Bernard L. Schwartz Professor of Economics and Policy Analysis, The New School for Social Research, New York City, NY.................................... 15 Prepared statement........................................... 17 Summary statement............................................ 33 Doonan, Dan, Executive Director, National Institute on Retirement Security, Washington, DC....................................... 33 Prepared statement........................................... 36 Summary statement............................................ 52 Greszler, Rachel, Senior Research Fellow, The Heritage Foundation, Washington, DC..................................... 52 Prepared statement........................................... 55 Summary statement............................................ 75 Stevenson, Eric, President, Nationwide Retirement Solutions, Nationwide Mutual Insurance Company, Columbus, OH.............. 75 Prepared statement........................................... 77 Summary statement............................................ 84 ADDITIONAL MATERIAL Statements, articles, publications, letters, etc. Sanders, Hon. Bernie: AARP, Statement for the Record............................... 99 Better Markets, Statement for the Record..................... 106 Letters from the National United Committee To Protect Pensions................................................... 141 Economic Policy Institute, Statement for the Record.......... 145 Cassidy, Hon. Bill: Insurer Retirement Institute, Statement for the Record....... 156 American Retirement Association, Statement for the Record.... 163 American Council of Life Insurers, Statement for the Record.. 167 The Erisa Industry Committee, Statement for the Record....... 171 American Benefits Council Proposal for Enhancing Retirement Security by Strengthening the Single-Employer Defined Benefit Plan System........................................ 179 Ghilarducci, Teresa: The Last Thing Americans Need, Newsweek Article.............. 194 Worry When Gov't Pushes Their Retirement Plan, Newsmax Article.................................................... 195 ``Working longer won't solve the retirement crisis - seniors need a `Gray New Deal' to retire with dignity, this economist says.'' MarketWatch Interview.................... 196 Work, Retire, Repeat......................................... 199 QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD Response by Teresa Ghilarducci, and Eric Stevenson, to questions of: Senator Hickenlooper......................................... 478 Response by Teresa Ghilarducci to questions of: Senator Markey............................................... 479 TAKING A SERIOUS LOOK AT THE RETIREMENT CRISIS IN AMERICA: WHAT CAN WE DO TO EXPAND DEFINED BENEFIT PENSION PLANS FOR WORKERS? ---------- Wednesday, February 28, 2024 U.S. Senate, Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions, Washington, DC. The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m., in room 430, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Bernard Sanders, Chairman of the Committee, presiding. Present: Senators Sanders , Casey, Baldwin, Kaine, Hassan, Hickenlooper, Cassidy, Braun, Marshall, Tuberville, and Budd. OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR SANDERS The Chair. The Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions will come to order. The purpose of this hearing is-- the issue we are going to discuss is of enormous consequence. But unfortunately, I don't think it is getting the attention that it deserves. I want to thank all of the witnesses for being here and I look forward to a good and serious discussion. Let me start off by saying that as a Nation, we have more income and wealth inequality today than we ever had in the history of America. While the billionaire class becomes wealthier, our social safety net for the most vulnerable in our Country remains far behind other wealthy nations. It's a disaster, and if we do not get our act together, it's only going to get worse. We have the highest rate of childhood poverty of almost any major nation. Our childcare system is now dysfunctional. More than 600,000 fellow Americans are homeless and over 85 million are uninsured or underinsured. But let's be clear, it's not just the children and the poor who in the richest country on earth are hurting. Our nation's senior citizens are struggling as well. The truth is that we now have a retirement crisis in America that demands our immediate attention, which brings us to the subject of today's hearing. In the United States today, almost 45 percent of older Americans between the ages of 55 and 64 have no savings at all and no idea how they will retire with any shred of dignity or respect. 45 percent of workers between 55 and 64, zero retirement savings. As frightening as the retirement crisis is for older workers, it is even a bigger concern for the millions of senior citizens who are no longer able to work, who have exhausted all of their savings, and who have no pensions at all. Incredibly, and this really is quite incredible, one out of every four senior citizens in America are trying to live on an income of less than $15,000 a year. Think about that. While over half of our Nation's seniors are trying to survive on an income of less than $30,000 a year. Just put yourself in the place of that person. How do you pay the rent? How do you pay for health care? Prescription drugs? How do you put food on the table on just $15,000 or even $30,000 a year? And the truth of the matter is that many cannot. That should not be happening in our Country. According to the OECD, the Organization for Economic Co- operation and Development, we now have the dubious distinction of not only having one of the highest rates of childhood poverty in the industrialized world for our children, we also have one of the highest rates of senior poverty compared to other wealthy nations as well. In Denmark, only 3 percent of seniors live in poverty. In France, 4.4. The United Kingdom, 15.5. But in America, over 23 percent of seniors are living in poverty. I would hope that we would agree that is simply unacceptable and that has got to change. 50 years ago, it was not uncommon for corporations to provide workers with a defined benefit pension plan that guaranteed a monthly income in retirement. Back then, many corporations made a promise to their workers, if they worked at the same company for a reasonable period of time, they would be rewarded with a monthly check that would enable them to live comfortably in retirement. Not a radical idea. That is what it was then. The longer you worked at the same company, the bigger your retirement check would be, and the employer would bear in those days all of the responsibility to fund the pensions of their workforce. Sadly, tragically, those days are mostly behind us. As a result of a relentless 40 year war on the working class waged by corporate America, traditional pension plans have become an endangered species on their way to extinction, and the result for workers has been tragic. In 1983, 31 percent of American workers were at risk of not being able to maintain their standard of living in old age. In 2020, that number rose to 51 percent. In other words, we are moving in exactly the wrong direction. All right, that's the problem. What do we do to address that crisis? First, at a time when far too many seniors are living in poverty and many have nothing in the bank for retirement, we must expand Social Security, not cut Social Security as many of my colleagues in Congress would have us do. Congress--and we must make Social Security solvent for the next 75 years so it will be there for our kids and our grandchildren. Legislation that I have introduced, along with nine co-sponsors, accomplishes those goals. According to the Social Security Administration, the legislation that I have introduced would make Social Security solvent for 75 years and increase benefits by $2,400 a year for seniors who need them. How do you do that? My goodness. How do you do that? Well, at a time of massive income and wealth inequality, we have the radical idea that maybe the people on top should start paying their fair share of taxes. Today, a billionaire pays the same amount of money into Social Security as somebody who makes $168,000 a year as a result of the cap on the Social Security payroll tax cut. You make $1 billion a year, you make $168,000 a year, you pay the same amount. Anybody in America think that makes sense? I don't. Legislation we have proposed would lift the cap on Social Security starting at $200,000. You do that, taxable income, Social Security is solvent for the next 75 years, increased benefits by $2,400 per person. But that's not all that we have to do. In my view, every corporation in America should be required to provide a retirement plan for their workers. If corporations choose not to offer a retirement plan, they must give workers the option of contributing to a Federal pension plan similar guess what, to what Members of Congress have. How is that? Good for Congress, good for the American people. Today, Federal employees and Members of Congress have a certain percentage of their salaries deducted from their paychecks and put into the First Program that provides a pension based on salary and years of service. Bottom line, if it is good for Members of Congress, our staff, it is good for the American people. So, it is where we are. We got a crisis. I think we have some commonsense solutions, and I look forward to working with Members of this Committee to address them. Senator Cassidy, the mic is yours. OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR CASSIDY Senator Cassidy. Thank you, Chair Sanders. A little odd, the focus today seems to be promoting the defined benefits system, prescribing an agenda, frankly, that is outdated and a little disconnected. In 1974, Congress passed the Employment Retirement Income Security Act, the ERISA Act, in response to tens of thousands of Americans losing their retirement security because their employers defined benefit system failed, exemplified by the collapse of Studebaker Automobile Company and about 1,800 other pension plans terminating over a 4-year period. Imagine the impact upon those hundreds of thousands of workers who were employed by them. Since ERISA, the defined benefits system has been largely replaced by the defined contribution which has flourished. As of 2021, 146 million Americans collectively own $9.5 trillion in retirement assets. Now, the advantage of the defined contribution system, why many have flocked to it, is that workers own their own retirement system. No matter what happens to the worker's current or previous employer, their retirement funds are secure and very few people now retire after 50 years at a company and get a golden watch. Most will move between employers. This allows them to do so while maintaining their retirement fund. Importantly, Congress just passed Secure Act 2.0 on a bipartisan basis, making improvements to our Nation's retirement system. We had the option to take the one such as the Chair is advocating for, and on a bipartisan basis, chose not to. Instead, based the solution primarily on the success of the defined contribution system. Secure 2.0 was so popular it passed out of all four Committees of jurisdiction with unanimous votes and on the House floor, can you imagine this, by a vote of 414 to 5. The Chair speaks of needing to find a solution to a crisis, but we have that solution. By the way, there are still provisions of Secure act 2.0 that have yet to be implemented, including those helping low income individuals. For example, the enhanced savers match, a tax credit going right into low income Americans' retirement accounts, which goes into effect in 2027. The Chair has referenced statistics pointing to a retirement crisis, but many of these are from 2021, which pre-date the passage of Secure 2.0, the improvements it has made, and the improvements that it will make, especially those targeting lower income Americans. Now, by the way, there is a place for defined benefit systems. With reforms, it can be successful. In 2006, we passed these reforms, which resulted in some of those funds now being overfunded, even weathering the 2009 financial crisis. However, these reforms have not been implemented in the largely unionized, utilized--union utilized multiemployer defined benefit space. Many of these multiemployer defined benefit plans have struggled for years when in 2021, they told Congress they needed a bailout. Many of the plans were badly mismanaged. Democrats passed a $90 billion bailout of the multiemployer defined benefit system on a party line vote without strings on the tax dollars to prevent--strings that would say you have to make these reforms to prevent future failures. Now, this lack of reform system is that which some wishes to expand. Unfortunately, the large labor unions successfully lobbied to make sure the bailout did not come with any meaningful reforms protecting workers and preventing future failure. Simple reforms like requiring certain funding levels, disclosures for defined benefit plans, requiring unions to provide beneficiaries with a clear report of their defined benefit program's financial state. Now we are seeing the results of the failure to enact these provisions. The Central States Pension Fund received a $127 million overpayment in their bailout because they included thousands of deceased participants in their bailout application. Let me give credit where credit is due. Teamster President Shawn O'Brien told this Committee the money should be repaid. However, the Central State Pension Fund now tells the Committee it would be impossible for them to repay the money that they were improperly paid. Workers covered by the Central State should be alarmed about the financial state of their retirement plan if returning money they weren't supposed to receive, would you stabilize the fund now. Frankly, it is infuriating to hear that the union's pension plan could be on the verge of collapse only a few years after they received tens of billions of dollars to bail. If the Chair truly wishes to expand the use of defined benefit plans, I am so happy to discuss reforms similar to the ones that have been very successful in the individual employer space, and pass them, to stabilize the entire defined benefit system. But we will have to overcome staunch union opposition to any reform that provides greater oversight and protection for their workers. Together, though, I think we could do it. To be clear, Republicans do not support putting the thumb on the scale to prefer either defined benefit or defined contribution. We support what works. Most businesses with individual employer defined benefit plans wish to continue to offer and expand their programs. If it is working, don't fix it. We are seeing the good work of companies who are importing the best of defined benefit system into the defined contribution, including many innovative lifetime income products. I agree with the Chair that lifetime income is desired by many Americans. Let's make it easier for the defined contribution to include them. There are things we can do on a bipartisan basis, which is why it was disappointing that rather working together to hold a bipartisan hearing, the majority planned this hearing on a partisan basis with no input from the minority on scope or legislative focus. We will need something bipartisan to pass with 60 votes. We can do it. Earlier this year, Senator Kaine and I introduced two bipartisan bills. The Helping Young Americans Save Retirement Act makes it easier for younger workers between the ages of 18 and 20 to save for retirement by removing barriers currently making it harder to join an employer's retirement plan. The Auto Enroll Act of 2023 assist workers who previously declined to participate or contributed little to the employer's pension plan. Many workers earlier in their career make less money. They want the money in their paycheck to pay for bills as opposed to contributing to retirement. But when their wages grow, we find they forget to opt back in to start contributing to their retirement. This legislation allows the business to periodically auto enroll employees back into their plans with the option to opt out, but that way they don't accidentally miss out on crucial years preparing for retirement. I hope the Chair will indulge with a markup of these bipartisan pieces of legislation. In closing, many other Members of this Committee had wonderful ideas that were included in the Secure 2.0. It will be great to explore the current--effectiveness of these provisions and discuss any other creative ideas that enhance the system we have. Thank you and I yield. The Chair. Thank you, Senator Cassidy. We have five excellent, knowledgeable witnesses. We are going to begin with Sarah Schambers. Ms. Schambers is a fourth generation Ford autoworker and has been a UAW member for 17 years. She spent her first 6 years as a full time--temporary employee at a Ford subsidiary in Plymouth, Michigan. In 2012, to secure permanent status and support her family, Sarah was forced to move from Michigan to Ford's Louisville assembly plant in Kentucky. She now works at Ford's Livonia transmission plant in Michigan as a member of the UAW Local 182. Ms. Schambers, thanks very much for being with us. STATEMENT OF SARA SCHAMBERS, UAW MEMBER, LOCAL 182, FORD LIVONIA TRANSMISSION, LIVONIA, MI Ms. Schambers. Thank you, and good morning. As Senator Sanders said, my name is Sarah Schambers. I am a proud fourth generation auto worker. I follow to my great grandfathers', my grandparents', and my mother's footsteps. I build cars for a living, and I am proud of the work that I have done. But the difference between my generation and past generations is they had a pension. I do not. I don't have health care when I retire, and I do not have retirement security. I have been an autoworker for 17 years. Six of those years I worked at Ford as a full time temporary employee until 2012. That was a big moment for me, because for generations, getting a job at Ford meant stability and security. It meant being able to plan for your yourself and your children. It meant being able to buy a house and see a future for yourself. But for those of us that hired in after the financial crisis, that has not been our truth. Instead, we have been fighting to get back the American dream and try to turn these jobs back into careers, just like they were when my parents and grandparents who built this country and the American auto industry. Two of my grandparents who retired from the big three had very different paths. My grandfather gave three decades to Ford Motor Company, and in return, he got to retire at age 55 with the pension and health care. He was afforded the dignity to have a life after Ford Motor Company. He was able to have a life with his kids, his grandchildren, and his great grandchildren, be a part of his community and not just work until he died. My grandmother, she had a different path. She was hit with Lou Gehrig's disease. She had to retire early for her illness. But she didn't have to choose between doctors, rent, or food. She knew she had health care and a pension to rely on as she retired and struggled through her health. For me, in sickness or in health, I don't know what my future holds. It causes fear and anxiety in the working people that don't know how long they are going to be able to last in a job. It makes people say, maybe I won't buy that house, maybe I won't put down roots in this community, or maybe I won't stay at this company. I didn't become a fourth generation autoworker because I loved building cars. I didn't become a fourth generation autoworker because I loved the low starting pay, or the lack of a retirement security that we now know. I come from a family of auto workers because for years it was a career, one that you would put work in and get something out of it. In a lot of ways, for generations, Ford was the American dream. It meant if I pitched in, if I worked hard, I would be able to have a life after Ford Motor Company. But without a pension, without health care, we have people leaving these companies after 30 years with nothing more than a have a nice day and I hope the stock market doesn't crash. That is unacceptable for America. As you know, the UAW won major victories in our 6 week strike. I am proud of the accomplishments that we have made after 15 years of falling behind after the financial crisis, but we still fall short of what generations of autoworkers had. We still fell short of what the American dream should be. The companies were adamant that they couldn't afford to add to our pension liability. They said that Wall Street would look down on them, and that giving back our pensions could affect their stock prices and possibly lead to lower credit ratings. Nowadays, a stock price is more important than 150,000 autoworkers. That is a shame. Our next big three contracts expire in 2028, and we are ready to fight like hell for retirement security, for pensions and health care when I retire. There is an old saying, we will strike if provoked. Well, I think that Wall Street calling the shots and telling the big three that autoworkers can't have retirement security, that is what I call being provoked. There is another old saying, which side are you on? I want to close by asking you, our U.S. Senators who represent us, which side are you on, the American workers who elect you or corporate greed in Wall Street who say a dignified retirement is too much for the American people to ask for. Thank you for your time.  prepared statement of sara schambers  ______  Sara Schambers is carrying on the legacy of four generations of autoworkers at Ford. She is the first generation without a pension. For the previous generations, a pension offered a dignified life after retirement or a safety net for when the times got tough, or their health declined. The work at Ford used to be a good, stable job. But, following the financial crisis, autoworkers have only known instability. Today, without a pension, we must fend for ourselves in retirement and hope that our investments pan out. Last year, the UAW's Stand Up strike won a 10 percent defined employer contribution at Ford, General Motors, and Stellantis--but not a pension. The companies claimed that Wall Street would not look favorably on an increase in their pension liability. In 2028 when the Big Three contracts expire, the UAW will fight for real retirement security--a pension and post-retirement health care. For that fight, we need Congress on our side. ______ The Chair. Thank you very much, Ms. Schambers. Our next witness will be Teresa Ghilarducci, who is a Professor of Economics at the New School in New York City. She has frequently published in economic journals and has authored several books on how we can ensure retirement security for all American workers. Thanks very much for being with us. STATEMENT OF TERESA GHILARDUCCI, IRENE AND BERNARD L. SCHWARTZ PROFESSOR OF ECONOMICS AND POLICY ANALYSIS, THE NEW SCHOOL FOR SOCIAL RESEARCH, NEW YORK CITY, NY  Ms. Ghilarducci. Sorry. Because of an inadequate pension system in the United States, our elder poverty rate exceeds all of our peers. We are the highest at 23 percent. In contrast, the poverty risk for Dutch elders is a very low 3 percent. The U.S. retirement system gets C's and D's on international benchmarks, and the Dutch system gets an A. You might hear about the average retirement wealth being quite high and actually growing, but for the typical American, the median retirement wealth has gone down for the bottom 90 percent because averages don't tell the story, distribution does. If Elon Musk walked on the witness stand today, he would be the richest on average witnesses of all time in the HELP Committee. But the typical retirement wealth for us would not go up. For the typical American approaching retirement, and my study looks at the elder households and their typical retirement wealth, the Social Security wealth is the most important. The stream of Social Security benefits, a defined benefit system, for those in the bottom half of the wealth distribution, is worth about $188,000, but they have zero retirement wealth and zero home equity. For the typical household in the next 40 percent, the middle class, their retirement wealth is only about $20,000, and they have, we have about $129,000 in home equity. It is only the top 10 percent who over the past 30 years have had rapid increase in their retirement health--retirement wealth, their health as well, and their home equity exceeds four times that of the middle class. This all adds up--into a lack of retirement readiness, and that lack of retirement readiness has materialized even though Congress has given lots of tax breaks for retirement savings. There are a lot of other proposed savings, policies like home owning incentives. There have been soaring tax breaks for savings, and there's been lots of substantial investments into financial advice and all sorts of retirement products. The U.S. retirement system has not flourished. It lacks three fundamental elements of a well-designed pension system. A well designed pension system only needs three things. It needs to help all Americans accumulate enough money into their retirement accounts. It needs to help all Americans invest well into their retirement accounts. It needs to have a good way for Americans to de-accumulate their retirement accounts and lifetime benefits. What is to be done? Well, Senators here have tried to protect the defined benefit system. Senators Cassidy and Kaine would mandate that ERISA plans let people into these plans earlier, at 18 not at 21. Your auto enroll act would help reinvigorate these auto enrollment provisions to help more participation. You may hear about auto IRAs. These are automatic individual retirement accounts. They are at the state level and at the Federal level. They are good baby steps for more access, but IRAs permit leakages and they do not pool investments. And because people access their individual retirement accounts for emergency savings, homeownership, and other life events, they should be called individual emergency savings accounts. They are not retirement accounts. But we can extend wealth building opportunities to all Americans. And one bipartisan, powerful proposal already exists. Senator Hickenlooper, along with Senator Tillis, Republican, Democrat, and also a Democrat and Republican in the House of Representatives, Terry Sewell and Lloyd Smucker, would expand retirement accounts to all public sector workers who don't have one. They do not crowd out existing accounts. It follows a successful thrift savings plan, again, the savings plan for the staff Members of Congress and for Members of Congress. It would feature automatic enrollment. It would feature portability, a good investment offer option, and sensible de-accumulation. It meets that three-prong test, and there is also a 5 percent match, which helps mitigate the top heaviness of our current match. It is endorsed by experts all across the political spectrum, the AARP, The Charles Schwab. Last week I was on a radio talk show, and the 25 year old NPR host asked me why professor is retirement in America becoming a luxury? My students asked me every semester, why do so many people in America who are old, why are they poor or why do they have to work? I congratulate Committee Members from both parties for recognizing the urgency, the disaster, and the crisis, and for your caring and your wisdom to solve it. I heard you all say that you need a bold bipartisan reform. Thank you.  prepared statement of teresa ghilarducci   Because of insufficient retirement wealth the U.S. elder poverty rate--by international standards has the highest--the highest, among rich nations at 23 percent, in contrast, the poverty risk for Dutch elders (the Netherlands is known for its top-ranking pension system) is only 3.1 percent. Ghilarducci uses Federal Reserve and University of Michigan data to show individuals nearing retirement age in the bottom half of the wealth distribution possess $188,300 in Social Security wealth, have no wealth in retirement accounts, and have a median home equity amount of zero. For the next highest 40 percent, the median Social Security stands at $300,500, $200,000 in retirement accounts and $128,500 in home equity. The top 10 percent of households hold $311,800 in Social Security, $764,700 in retirement accounts, and $305,000 in home equity. Despite various pro-savings policies, home-owning incentives, revisions to the tax code, and initiatives like ERISA, as well as substantial investments in financial advice and retail financial products, the U.S. retirement system lacks three fundamental elements of a well-designed pension system: universal access, portability and consistent contributions, good investment options, and lifetime benefits. Suggested solutions include protecting and expanding existing Defined Benefit (DB) plans, as some employers are reverting to DB plans after encountering high turnover rates. Senators Kaine and Cassidy's bill mandates ERISA plans to offer access to workers 18 and over instead of 21 and older. Kaine's Auto Reenroll Act of 2023 revitalizes the auto-enroll trigger every 3 years, encouraging more participation. Auto IRAs are baby steps to more access; but they fail to pool investments and permit leakages. ``Individual Retirement Accounts'' (IRAs), would more accurately be termed Individual Liquid Accounts (ILAs). While liquidity for emergency savings, homeownership, and funding various life events, is good tapping into retirement savings at young ages leaves inadequate funds for retirement. A comprehensive and bold retirement system plan can extend wealth- building to all American workers. Initiatives such as Universal Savings Accounts (USA) by Senator Tom Harkin and proposals for a Guaranteed Retirement Account (GRA) adhere to principles found in the world's best pension systems: universal access, portability, steady and adequate contributions, professional asset management, lifetime payouts, fair tax subsidies, and efficient administration. The Retirement Savings for Americans Act (RSAA) of 2023, sponsored by Senators John Hickenlooper and Thom Tillis, along with Representatives Terri Sewell and Lloyd Smucker, would offer retirement plans to private-sector workers lacking such provisions. Modeled after the successful Federal Thrift Savings Plan (TSP), the RSAA features automatic enrollment, portability, low fees, and favorable returns. The RSAA mitigates the top-heaviness in retirement tax breaks, where the top 20 percent of taxpayers currently receive over 60 percent of the $267 billion spent by the Federal Government. The RSAA proposes a match of up to 5 percent for workers in the bottom half of the earnings distribution saving 5 percent for retirement. Endorsed by organizations and experts across the political spectrum, the RSAA boasts bipartisan, bicameral sponsorship. Drawing examples from other nations where funded pension systems operate to provide adequate benefits and universal access, Ghilarducci emphasizes the need for comprehensive reforms to ensure retirement security for all Americans. ______ The Chair. Thank you very much. Our next witness will be Dan Doonan, who is the Executive Director of the National Institute on Retirement Security. He has more than 20 years of experience working on retirement issues. Mr. Doonan, thanks a lot for being with us. STATEMENT OF DAN DOONAN, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, NATIONAL INSTITUTE ON RETIREMENT SECURITY, WASHINGTON, DC Mr. Doonan. Thank you. Chairman Sanders, Ranking Member Cassidy, and Members of the Senate Health Committee, I appreciate the opportunity to testify on the state of retirement in the United States and the role of defined benefit pensions and delivering retirement security. I am Dan Doonan, Executive Director of NIRS, and we are a nonpartisan, nonprofit think tank in Washington, DC. and we have a broad membership base, financial services companies, plan sponsors, labor unions and nonprofits, including AARP. Congress has made progress to address America's retirement crisis. The Secure Act and Secure Act 2.0 were steps in the right direction. However, much work remains to ensure that Americans can be self-sufficient in retirement. The key points I would like to make today are, first, Americans do face an alarming retirement savings shortfall. Second, the move away from pensions is a major culprit in the Nation's retirement crisis. 401(k) plans are an important part of the retirement equation. They were just not designed to replace pensions. And third, today's pension designs and management can be beneficial for employers, workers, and the economy more broadly. Pensions are the most economically efficient way to deliver retirement income, and they offer workforce advantages to employers. Pensions paid out more than $600 billion in 2020, supporting $1.3 trillion in economic activity. And pensions, of course, are user friendly for workers and face little leakage. In the past, the biggest challenge has been for employers. The costs have been unstable. But today, there are more sophisticated tools and benefit designs that have addressed this challenge. I believe that if companies give pensions a fresh look, they will discover that win-win solutions are possible. Diving a little deeper into the gravity of the U.S. retirement problem, the data clearly shows most Americans will not have enough money for a financially secure retirement, and they are worried about it. Our Generation X research found that the bottom half of Gen X earners only had a few thousand dollars saved for retirement, and the median household, not individuals, but household, has only $40,000 in retirement savings. Also, retirement savings for Gen X are highly concentrated amongst the highest earners. More broadly, the National Retirement Risk Index finds that half of U.S. households will not be able to maintain their standard of living when they retire. Americans understand the scope of this crisis. 79 percent of Americans agree there is a retirement crisis, with 55 percent concerned that they cannot achieve financial security in retirement. Looking ahead, the burden of preparing for retirement increases as we live longer, face large risks without risk pooling, and deal with rising costs. Research shows that the Nation's individual savings based system is not well suited for workers. It is important to note 401(k)'s were never meant to replace pensions. They were meant to be a supplemental vehicle. Conventional wisdom suggests that 401(k)'s cost less, but I think what I hear when that is said, it means we are putting less money into a less efficient system and--as costs rise and hoping for the best. Post retirement brings the biggest challenges and inefficiencies. Our news research asks how much retirement income could $100,000 nest egg generate annually for someone at age 65? The responses were jarring. Only 8 percent of workers provided an accurate response. Most wildly overestimated the level of income they could count on. Third, many assume that pensions have similar benefit designs, and nothing could be further from the truth. Two public plans provide an example and are very transparent in their operations, the Wisconsin Retirement System and the South Dakota Retirement System. My written comments provide a chart showing the remarkable cost stability of these systems throughout volatile times. Fourth, the ground is shifting with respect to the employers offering pensions. We have heard about the interest of UAW to return to pensions, and we have all read the news about IBM moving back to pensions, which actually produces substantial cash savings for IBM as well. Finally, my written testimony details policy issues that could help facilitate a pension renaissance. These key issues are about enabling companies to employ fiscally cautious funding strategies that reduce cost volatility over time, without a major disincentive to err on the safe side. In conclusion, thank you for holding this important hearing and the opportunity to testify. I will be happy to respond to questions.  prepared statement of dan doonan   Congress has made progress to address America's retirement crisis. The SECURE Act and SECURE 2.0 were steps in the right direction. However, much work remains to ensure that Americans can be self- sufficient in retirement. Research finds that Americans face an alarming retirement savings shortfall. Generation X is fast approaching retirement and will be the first generation to retire largely without a pension. The bottom half of GenX earners have only a few thousand dollars saved for retirement, and the median household has only $40,000 in retirement savings. Retirement savings for GenX are highly concentrated among the highest earners. Americans are deeply worried about retirement. Seventy-nine percent of Americans agree there is a retirement crisis, and 55 percent are concerned they cannot achieve financial security in retirement. Looking ahead, the burden of preparing for retirement is increasing as Americans live longer, face large risks without risk pooling, and deal with rising costs. The move away from pensions is a major culprit in the Nation's retirement crisis. While 401(k) plans are an important part of the retirement equation, they just were not designed to replace pensions. Today's pension designs and management can be beneficial for employers, workers, and the economy. Pensions are the most economically efficient way to deliver retirement income, and they offer workforce advantages to employers. Pensions paid out more than $600 billion in benefits in 2020, supporting $1.3 trillion in economic activity. Also, pensions are user-friendly for workers. In the past, the biggest challenge for employers has been unstable costs. But today, there are sophisticated tools and benefit designs that have addressed this challenge. If companies give pensions a fresh look, they will discover that win-win solutions are possible. The ground is shifting with respect to employers offering pensions. Last year, the UAW's negotiations with The Big Three Automakers called for a restoration of pension benefits. While only increases to 401(k)'s were part of the final deal, the UAW has signaled it will continue to advocate for pensions. Also, IBM recently announced it would reopen its pension plan and end its 401(k) matching contributions, which produces substantial cash savings for IBM. There are policies that could be enacted to help facilitate a ``pension renaissance.'' These key issues are about enabling companies to employ fiscally cautious funding strategies that reduce cost volatility, without major disincentives to err on the safe side. ______ The Chair. Thank you very much, Mr. Doonan. Senator Cassidy, you want to introduce your witness? Senator Cassidy. Yes, please. My pleasure to introduce Rachel Greszler, a Senior Research Fellow at the Heritage Foundation's Row Institute, whose work focuses on retirement labor policies that promote economic growth, individual freedom, and--well-being. Before joining Heritage, Mr. Greszler was a Senior Economist for the United States Congressional Joint Economic Committee. She holds a B.A. in Economics from the University of Mary Washington, as well as a master's degree in Public Policy and Economics from Georgetown. Welcome, Ms. Greszler. We appreciate you being here and look forward to your testimony. STATEMENT OF RACHEL GRESZLER, SENIOR RESEARCH FELLOW, THE HERITAGE FOUNDATION, WASHINGTON, DC Ms. Greszler. Thank you for the opportunity to be here this morning. In my testimony, I would like to look at the current state of American's retirement security and also discuss the failure of certain defined benefit pensions. Older Americans' financial well-being is strong by historic standards. The share of older Americans with no retirement savings fell to 12 percent in 2022. Even after excessive inflation has eaten away at the value of American savings, retirees' real incomes are up over 30 percent over the past 35 years. Importantly, the lowest earners have the highest replacement rates in retirement. Households in the bottom 20 percent average 123 percent of their pre-retirement incomes, whereas households at the top average 75 percent. Older Americans report greater financial well-being than any other age group, and over the past 10 years, the percentage of people over 65 who say that they are just getting by or having a hard time getting by fell by half. As retirement savings have shifted from defined benefit to defined contribution plans, assets have surged. At $41.5 trillion, Americans' inflation adjusted retirement assets have increased 330 percent over the last 35 years. Defined benefit and defined contribution plans can provide secure retirement, but when not managed properly, defined benefit plans can end up like Ponzi schemes. That is what has happened with Social Security and multi- employer or union pensions. Past and current Congresses have failed to properly manage Social Security and failed to require sound funding rules for union pensions. Now, neither can come close to providing retirees what they have promised. Social security will be insolvent in 9 years and will implement 23 percent across the board benefit cuts. That is a $5,300 per year cut for the average retiree. Now, a program that was supposed to prevent older--younger generations from having to bear the burden of older generations, has instead amassed a $22.4 trillion unfunded obligation. That amounts to a $172,000 for every household in America. Simply maintaining current benefits would require the average household to pay at least $3,000 more per year in taxes. That money would be far better off in a personal account. My analysis shows that if a younger worker today were allowed to put their Social Security taxes into a personal account, they would have three times as much in retirement after purchasing an annuity. Policymakers must reform Social Security before it becomes an even worse deal for younger workers. By shifting toward a universal benefit and making other common sense changes, policymakers can improve the program, increase economic growth, and enable greater personal savings. Private union pension plans are an even worse disaster than Social Security. Multiemployer pension funding has $823 billion in unfunded obligations as of 2021 and $0.41 on the dollar in promised benefits. This underfunding is systemic. 96 percent of participants are in a plan that is less than 60 percent funded. This happened because unions took advantage of preferential rules that allowed them to increase benefits without requiring higher contributions to fund those benefits. Yet, instead of fixing the broken multiemployer system, Congress passed the worst possible type of bailout, one that picks winners and losers, does absolutely nothing to fix the root problems, and which encourages more recklessness. While roughly 15 percent of union plans are now privy to taxpayer bailouts, about 10 million workers are in plans that won't receive bailouts and it will still become insolvent. To prevent union workers and retirees from receiving less than half of their promised benefits, and to prevent taxpayers from having to pay another $700 billion in bailouts, Congress must shore up the PBGC and apply the same funding rules to union pensions as it does to nonunion pensions. Social Security and union pensions are anything but secure. The last thing that Americans need is for lawmakers to try to put more of their retirement savings into accounts that they neither own nor control, and which are managed by groups of people who have repeatedly put their own personal incentives above workers' and retirees' well-being. To help improve the financial security of all Americans, including younger workers who face the greatest financial struggles today, policymakers should enact universal savings accounts so that it is simpler and easier for Americans to save for all types of expected and unexpected life events. Thank you.  prepared statement of rachel greszler   My name is Rachel Greszler. I am a senior research fellow at The Heritage Foundation. The views I express in this testimony are my own and should not be construed as representing any official position of The Heritage Foundation. In my testimony today, I would like to make three main points: First, older Americans; financial well-being is strong by historic standards, and older generations are significantly better off financially than younger generations. The shift from defined benefit pension plans to defined contribution benefit plans has been accompanied by increases in workers' retirement savings participation and in retirees' incomes. Current trends do not indicate either that younger Americans are unprepared for retirement or that it makes sense for them, as a whole, to increase their savings and forgo current consumption in exchange for higher future consumption. Policymakers should make it simpler and easier for Americans to save for all types of expected and unexpected life events throughout their lifetimes. Second, Social Security is in crisis as the program will be insolvent in just 9 years, and every single retiree will be subject to 23 percent benefit cuts, averaging $5,300 per retiree. Social Security has veered far beyond its original vision and consequently provides a raw deal for younger generations. Maintaining the program or increasing benefits will require enormous tax increases that will reduce economic growth and leave households with significantly lower incomes. Every year that policymakers delay action means trillions of dollars more in either benefit cuts or tax increases. Policymakers should act immediately to preserve Social Security for those who need it most and to improve the program for current workers and future generations. Third, defined benefit multiemployer and state and local pension funds are in disastrous shape. Taxpayers have already been forced to bail out select private multiemployer or union pension plans, and Congress did absolutely nothing to address the problems remaining for the overwhelming majority of union pension plans that are on track to provide roughly half of what they promised to provide for workers and retirees. Without congressional action, retirees and taxpayers are at risk of more than $700 billion in additional pension losses or taxpayer costs. Comparisons should never be made between defined benefit plans that would be bankrupt without taxpayer funds and defined contribution plans that have not received taxpayer bailouts. ______ The Chair. Thank you very much. Senator Cassidy. First, Ms. Greszler, you almost nailed your 5 minutes. Let me just compliment you. Now I have the pleasure to introduce Mr. Eric Stevenson, the President of Retirement Solutions at Nationwide. Bringing more than 17 years of experience, having joined Nationwide in 2006, he holds his bachelor of Business and Finance from the University of Oklahoma and master's of Business Administration degree from Northwestern University. He is responsible for overseeing Nationwide's retirement plans operation, and for delivering workplace solutions for plan sponsors and participants. Mr. Stevenson, welcome back to the U.S. Senate and thank you for being here. STATEMENT OF ERIC STEVENSON, PRESIDENT, NATIONWIDE RETIREMENT SOLUTIONS, NATIONWIDE MUTUAL INSURANCE COMPANY, COLUMBUS, OH Mr. Stevenson. Well, good morning. And, Chairman Sanders, Ranking Member Cassidy, and Members of the Committee, thank you for convening today's hearing to discuss the Nation's retirement system and how we can better meet the needs of America's workers and retirees. As was mentioned, my name is Eric Stevenson. I am President of Nationwide Retirement Solutions and Nationwide Mutual Insurance Company, a fortune 100 company based in Columbus, Ohio. We provide a full range of insurance and financial services products. Nationwide administers 26,000 retirement plans, protecting nearly $200 billion in participant assets and helping to secure financial futures for over 2.5 million participants, with a top provider of Governmental 457 retirement plans, with 7,600 plans serving 1.84 million workers. We also help--we also focus on helping small business employers--employees where the average plan size is 40 employees or less for nearly 25,000 401(k) plans in that space. When Nationwide began the retirement solutions business back in 1973, it was a very different landscape than we see today. Employers offering pensions took on the risk and the burden of managing that asset on behalf of their employees, most of whom would work for that employer for their entire career before retiring with their benefits. By 1975, there were two defined contribution plans for every one defined benefit plan in the market. The burden of managing retirement assets began to shift onto the shoulders of the retirement saver, and away from the employer, the plan sponsor. While neither of these solutions on their own is perfect, traditional DBs kept employees tied with their employer through vesting requirements and service based benefit calculations. DC plans expected average employees to have the knowledge and the confidence to manage their own investment choices with little support. But both systems had significant upsides. Traditional DBs offer the security of a predictable and reliable income stream throughout retirement, often including some survivor benefits too. DC were portable and could be moved with the worker from job to job as they search for higher pay and new opportunities. Now in 2024, we have the ability to take the best of both systems and move past their less desirable features. The successful passage of Secure Act of 2019 and Secure Act of 2022 created opportunities to innovate and improve the plans and offerings that didn't previously exist. Today's DC plans come with a host of education, support, and financial planning tools. There are tax incentives to encourage small businesses to offer plans to employees, and to make employer contributions to their savings. Student loan matching helps young savers start early, auto enroll features get more and more workers saving for retirement. Most importantly, plans can now easily integrate protected retirement income into employer sponsored plans. Workers with access to these products can select to invest in them, knowing what their guaranteed income will be upon retirement. Nationwide has dedicated significant resources to build out a comprehensive suite of products in our platform to specifically meet these needs. Encouraging plan sponsors to offer at least one protected retirement income solution in their plans will go a long way in making sure that people have guaranteed income when they retire. 2024 represents 4.4 million Americans are going to turn 65, the largest number in our history. That is 12,000 people are turning 65 a day. With that kind of trend, I am especially energized to be here today with all of you seeking the same goal of a secure retirement for America's workers, and I look forward to your questions as we look for ways to solve this crisis.  prepared statement of eric stevenson Good morning. I would like to thank Chairman Sanders, Ranking Member Cassidy, and all Members of the Senate Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions Committee for holding this hearing on American retirement security and for the invitation to testify. My name is Eric Stevenson. As president of Nationwide's retirement plans business, I manage the team responsible for Nationwide's retirement plans operation. We protect nearly $200B in participant assets for over 2.7 million participants. I am passionate about fostering a culture that embraces collaboration to bring value to Nationwide's customers that meets and exceeds the unique retirement readiness needs of plan sponsors and participants. I have nearly 18 years of experience in the industry, starting at Nationwide in 2007 as Vice President of Marketing, then leading Sales and Distribution for Nationwide's retirement plans business and now serving as the business president since July 2019. I earned my Bachelor of Business Administration in Finance from the University of Oklahoma and my Master of Business Administration degree from Northwestern University Kellogg Graduate School of Management. I am also dedicated to public service, serving in a 7-year term confirmed by the Oklahoma Senate for the OU Board of Regents. Nationwide is a mutual insurer and a Fortune 100 company based in Columbus, Ohio, and is one of the largest and strongest diversified insurance and financial services organizations in the United States. Nationwide is rated A+ by Standard & Poor's. An industry leader in driving customer-focused innovation, Nationwide provides a full range of insurance and financial services products including auto, business, homeowners, farm, and life insurance; public and private sector retirement plans, annuities and mutual funds; excess and surplus, specialty and surety; pet, motorcycle and boat insurance. In 1973, Nationwide Retirement Solutions, Inc. was founded to focus on the needs of governmental employees, and we have been a major innovator in this market ever since. As one of the first companies to focus on public sector 457 plan workers, Nationwide has over 50 years of experience with this unique workforce. Today, Nationwide is the largest retirement plan provider serving the public sector with over 7,500 government sector retirement plans, ranging from small county and city plans to mega-size state plans. In addition to the public sector, Nationwide also administers over 15,000 retirement plans in the private sector defined contribution and not-for-profit marketplace, many of which representing small businesses with 100 employees or less. Protecting nearly $200 billion in participant assets, Nationwide is the 9th largest provider of retirement plans in the U.S. by number of plans administered (about 26,000) and 12th by number of participants, with about 2.58 million. We are the top provider of governmental retirement plans (457 plans) by number of plans and focus on meeting the needs of smaller plans. We manage 6,826 plans with less than $10 million in assets and 147 plans with more than $100 million in assets . Nationwide greatly appreciates the efforts of the Committee to continually improve our Nation's retirement system in a bipartisan manner. We commend the Chairman and Ranking Member for their leadership in this regard. Reaching a Peak: More Workers Than Ever Turning 65 While retirement security is always a relevant topic, it is particularly important today as more American workers will turn 65 in 2024 than at any point in history. This is a momentous milestone for the Boomer generation and especially for those who will celebrate reaching the traditional retirement age this year, which is roughly 12,000 people every day. After focusing for so long on saving for retirement, they are now facing uncertainty about generating steady retirement income and drawing down their savings. A recent Nationwide Retirement Institute survey polled 1,000 people between the ages of 60-65, split almost evenly between those who are still working and those already retired. The results revealed that many people who have yet to retire have expectations for their futures that differ from the realities experienced by many current retirees. The survey found one-third of current retirees in this age range are considering returning to work, with half (50 percent) citing the fear of running out of money or currently running out of money as their top reason for doing so. For decades, we have educated Americans on the importance of saving for retirement. That is still an absolute need, but the opportunity for the future is to help them plan for decumulation and income they won't outlive. Our survey found clear correlation between guaranteed retirement income and confidence in retirement. We found that 60-65-year-olds with a pension are more confident about their financial futures. Current workers who have pensions are more likely to say they're on track to retire when planned, compared to those who don't have pensions at work (78 percent versus 59 percent). When these workers do retire, that pension income results in a greater sense of financial comfort (74 percent versus 63 percent of retirees without pensions) and fewer concerns about outliving their money (64 percent versus 74 percent). In a separate survey we conducted in 2023 of older workers participating in a 401(k) plan at work, 73 percent indicated that they wish their plan offered a pension-like income option. Unfortunately, fewer Americans have access to pensions these days. That's why it's so critical for the financial services industry and policymakers to work together to create more opportunities for American workers to convert their savings into streams of income they can't outlive. The SECURE Act of 2019 and SECURE 2.0 Act of 2023 were huge steps forward in this effort, creating opportunities for employers to offer in-plan protected retirement solutions. We've launched an entire suite of these products and are seeing strong traction in adoption among plan sponsors and participants. As we think about the next iteration of retirement legislation, finding more opportunities to help retirement savers address the decumulation challenge should be a top priority. Retirement Security Starts Early At Nationwide, we aim to support Americans throughout their entire financial wellness journey, culminating in a secure and dignified retirement. We find it helpful to think about this journey in three key phases: Beginning Planning Saving for Retirement Living in Retirement The Committee's ongoing work to improve our retirement system has benefited all three phases of American workers' journeys to financial wellness. The recent successes of both the SECURE Act of 2019 and the SECURE 2.0 Act of 2023 have increased access, encouraged higher savings rates, and increased innovative in-plan guarantee options for retirement savers. Phase 1: Beginning Planning The Beginning Planning stage of the financial wellness journey requires that workers have both an opportunity to save for retirement and the financial means to fund that savings opportunity. While anyone with income may open an Individual Retirement Account (IRA), the benefits of saving in an employer-sponsored plan are significant, including better pricing on products, lower fees, and higher contribution limits. The previous few years, including the pandemic, have shown just how important it is to have both short-term and long- term savings and what role employers can play in providing access to those benefits. Much of the work done in both SECURE and SECURE 2.0 provided opportunities to help advance coverage for employees, especially those that work for employers with 100 or fewer employees. There was also work done to make saving easier and more accessible to retirement savers, like student loan payment matching and enhancements to emergency savings. Access is Critical Many of the changes brought about by SECURE 2.0 are not immediately obvious but provide significant impacts. The work by Senators Hickenlooper and Collins, for example, to simplify trustee and filing requirements for Pooled Employer Plans (PEPs) and Groups of Plans remove significant bureaucratic hurdles for small employers wanting to provide retirement benefits to their employees. Senator Hassan also was a leader in this area, making PEPs accessible to charities and public educational institutions and more widely available to small businesses. And Senator Collins reformed and improved the rules for SIMPLE plans, increasing contributions for all employees and permitting more flexibility in moving from a SIMPLE plan to a 401(k) plan. When working with small businesses, it is important to understand that often the business owner is the manager, human resources, and benefits team all rolled into one. Removing red tape and making processes easier, faster, and less expensive goes a long way toward addressing the gap in coverage for employees of those small businesses. Another area of access that has been significantly improved is long-time, part-time workers and other workers that change locations frequently, like military spouses. Among many provisions, Senator Murray's work in SECURE 2.0 to bring the long-term part-time worker requirement down from 3 years to 2 years will positively impact more seasonal and part-time employees by providing access to employer plans sooner. Senators Hassan and Collins also made progress in this area for military spouses by providing a tax credit to small employers that hire, make eligible, and provide immediate vesting to military spouses. These are two important groups that previously had limited, if any, access to employer sponsored plans. As each of these provisions of SECURE 2.0 is implemented, we will see more and more employers adopting retirement plans for their employees. Gaps remain in the system, however, and Nationwide supports efforts to close those gaps. Requiring employer-sponsored plans to allow 18-21- year-old employees to participate in the plan is another way to ensure access and encourage early saving. Ranking Member Cassidy and Senator Kaine's Helping Young Americans Save for Retirement Act would do just that. Nationwide supports this effort and applauds the sponsors for their attention to creating more access and more early savings. Research and practical experience have shown access to a workplace retirement plan is a key component to a successful retirement. Nationwide supports the efforts of Members of this Committee and those of your House counterparts--like Ways and Means Ranking Member Neal--to enable access to workplace retirement savings options for all American workers. We look forward to continuing to work on a bipartisan basis to find solutions to the coverage gap and to help every working American build toward a secure retirement. Competing Priorities: Emergency Savings and Student Loan Debt As a recordkeeper for our plan sponsors, we often get feedback on the reasons that employees provide about why they choose not to participate in the employer's plan. One of the most common reasons we heard was a fear of not having access to those funds in the event of an emergency. Working with Senators Lankford and Bennet, we supported the $1,000 withdrawal provision in SECURE 2.0 because we believe that it will remove that fear and encourage more middle-and lower-income workers to begin saving earlier. We also worked closely with Senators Young, Booker, and Murray on the pension linked savings account in SECURE 2.0 because we believe that employers and employees should have options when it comes to emergency savings. Student loan debt is another frequently cited hurdle to workers saving for retirement. However, the passage of SECURE 2.0 now allows for employers to make matching contributions into a retirement account when employees make qualifying payments to that debt, alleviating some of that burden for early savers. It's no secret that many Americans are struggling with student loan debt. And while you could assume it's only younger people who are concerned, older generations are also feeling burdened with these payments. A 2023 survey by the Nationwide Retirement Institute found that even seasoned employees experienced significant financial pressures due to the resumption of student loan payments on October 1, 2023. Over 1 in 10 (12 percent) employees ages 45+ currently have student loan debt and most of these individuals (61 percent) agree the reinstatement of student loan payments has negatively impacted their financial stability and long-term planning. Another two-thirds (66 percent) agree repayments will significantly affect their ability to save for retirement. Our 2023 survey revealed that employees ages 45+ with student loan debt have or are considering taking several steps to manage repayments--with some being more detrimental to their long-term financial strategy than others: 29 percent are planning to adjust their retirement plan contributions in order to keep up with their student loan payments. 18 percent have already adjusted their retirement plan contributions. 49 percent are reconsidering the feasibility of their retirement goals in light of their student loan debt. Due to the impact of student loan repayments on their long-term strategy, 85 percent of employees ages 45+ with student loan debt would be interested if their employer offered a match to their loan repayments for retirement savings. Offering a student loan match will be an immediate winner for employers with employees seeing it as such a valuable tool for them as they address their financial needs of today and tomorrow. Although the retirement industry can't solve the broader societal challenges created by student loan debt, we do believe that the existing retirement system can be utilized to alleviate some of the immediate pressure and long-term financial impact on workers. In recent years, we have increasingly seen employers take a greater interest in providing for the overall financial health of their employees. At Nationwide, we believe that both the student loan employer match provision and emergency savings provisions will become popular employer-provided benefits, as they help employers both respond to workers' concerns over current financial burdens and help ensure a better retirement savings outcome for their workers. Phase 2: Saving for Retirement The Saving for Retirement phase of the financial wellness journey emphasizes taking advantage of tax-deferred savings opportunities to the extent possible for an individual and ensuring that any amounts saved are invested efficiently, such as through the avoidance of excessive fees. Every dollar saved must be maximized to give workers the best chance at reaching their retirement savings goals. Here, it is not only important that individuals save as much as possible, but also that plan sponsors and financial professionals provide appropriate products and solutions that put those savings to work for the benefit of the saver. Creating and cultivating beneficial behaviors early is a crucial part of this process. Success of Auto-enroll and Need for Auto-Re-enroll As Chairman Sanders noted in the announcement of this hearing, we know that ``workers are 15 times more likely to save for retirement if they do so via payroll deduction and 20 times more likely to save if access to a workplace retirement plan is automatic.'' The success of auto-enroll programs has been exceptional and at Nationwide we see the benefits of this on a regular basis, both as a recordkeeper and as a plan sponsor. Automation and defaults work. The more we can integrate these features into standard plan design, the more we can help Americans save. At Nationwide we administer plans in the smaller-mid market 401(k) where the SECURE 2.0 provision around auto-enroll for new plans will have a huge impact. We also administer plans in the government/ public sector where state legislative action is generally required to permit auto-enroll and auto-escalate features. One of our large state plans successfully lobbied to gain auto-enroll for their state employees in 2019, and they have seen tremendous results: Participants are automatically enrolled at the plan minimum of $15/pay. The average deferral is $42/month, well above the minimum. The opt-out rate is holding steady at 6 percent, meaning 94 percent participation. 14,000 new participants have been added to the plan since the launch of auto-enroll. These new participants have saved roughly $11M for their retirement. In the private sector, we have seen significantly increased outcomes for retirement savers enrolled through auto-enroll programs. In 2007, Nationwide implemented auto-enroll and auto-escalate features in the Nationwide Retirement Savings Plan (401(k)) for our associates. We have seen enormous success. Prior to auto-enrollment and auto- escalation, the participation rate across all associates was at 74 percent, and following the first year of auto-enrollment the participation rate jumped 20 percent to 94 percent. With further design refinements over time, including changes to auto-escalation amounts, now just over 98 percent of all Nationwide associates participate in the plan at an average deferral rate of 9.27 percent of income. For comparison, peer companies with similar plan features average 92 percent participation at a deferral rate of 5.2 percent of income. This is a success story not just for Nationwide, but for every individual associate that is saving for their future and taking advantage of the employer match. These features have established default optimal behavior, helping even those associates who would otherwise procrastinate or put off planning to save substantially for their retirement over time with no effort required on their part. The reason to support auto-enrollment and auto-re-enrollment is that saving earlier in one's career can significantly impact the total savings accumulated by retirement age. In 2018, Nationwide conducted a study looking at the impact of beginning retirement saving earlier in one's career. On average, employees start saving for retirement at age 31.5. If those employees consistently save until they reach Social Security's normal retirement age, they'd have about 35 years of asset accumulation and potential investment earnings at retirement. However, if they started saving for retirement 8 years sooner, they could have significantly more available for retirement income. If you take a specific example where an employee is paid twice a month and contributes $50 per pay to an account that earns 6 percent annualized return on investment and the employee starts at age 23, they'd have $88,572 more than if they started at age 31. At $100 per pay, the difference would be $177,143.60. The importance of getting into a retirement savings habit early on in one's career cannot be overstated. For many Americans, their retirement plan is the single largest asset and investment vehicle they have. We strongly support Ranking Member Cassidy and Senator Kaine's Auto Re-enroll Act of 2023. Ensuring that employers can automatically re- enroll eligible employees into the retirement plan, at least once every 3 years, will enhance the retirement savings for those employees. As positions and wages change, employees are more likely to remain in the plan and take advantage of benefits like employer matches, student loan matches, and other benefits that increase retirement savings. In-Plan Protected Retirement Options The shift from Defined Benefit (DB) to Defined Contribution (DC) as the primary retirement savings vehicle has placed a lot more responsibility on the American worker, while taking away this idea that a pension--income in retirement--is provided. Nationwide is optimistic that the provisions enacted as part of SECURE and SECURE 2.0 to make in-plan guarantees more available within defined contribution plans is the first and critical step to offer American workers protected retirement solutions to provide a ``pension-like'' income stream in their DC plans. The ability for retirement savers to save into and rely on in-plan protected retirement products is a high priority. We've heard from savers, employers, and other providers that more attention needs to be paid to the plan for living from one's savings before employees reach retirement age. In response to that need, Nationwide has worked to offer an expansive suite of in-plan protected income options. These are products that fit within an employer plan and provide access to a variety of guaranteed income options once the saver has reached retirement. Over the past 3 years, Nationwide has demonstrated significant growth by partnering with other firms to expand the reach of these protected retirement options so that they are available on Nationwide's platforms as well as other plan providers. As of January 2024, Nationwide has helped nearly 7,000 employer-sponsored plans to add a guaranteed income solution inside their retirement plan for their participants. While this progress is notable, it's not enough. Nationwide is supporting the industry coming together to provide and adopt these solutions for all employer sponsored retirement plans. We believe that the option should be available to all employees to have a portion of their hard-earned retirement savings guaranteed to cover essential living expenses in retirement. We encourage the Members of this Committee to support the Lifetime Income for Employees Act (LIFE Act) which expands the ability for annuitized products to be offered as qualified default investment alternatives (QDIAs) within employer plans. Collective Investment Trusts in 403(b) Plans Collective investment trusts (``CITs'') are an investment option that often have lower costs than mutual funds. Although CITs may be used in 401(k) and certain other retirement plans, U.S. Securities laws currently prevents 403(b)(7) custodial accounts, which are often used by nonprofit, healthcare, and higher education employers, from investing in CITs. The nonprofit and higher education worlds employ over 12.5 million people saving for their retirement, and those savers should have the same access to proven and low-cost vehicles within their institutional plans that their private-sector taxable counterparts enjoy. Nationwide therefore supports Retirement Fairness for Charities and Educational Institutions Act of 2023 that would permit 403(b)(7) custodial accounts to invest in CITs (in addition to the stock of regulated investment companies, which is permitted under current law). We are pleased to partner with our friends at National Association of Government Defined Contribution Administrators (NAGDCA) in supporting this important provision and encourage the Senate to take up this bill. Caregiver Assistance Through Tax Credits and Additional Catchups Throughout many people's working lives there are times when one may need to step away from employment to act as a primary caregiver to a family member, young or old. It is vital for the health of the caregiver's retirement savings that time away from work be recognized. The Credit for Caring Act, introduced by Senators Collins, Hassan, and their cosponsors would provide caregivers with a tax credit that offsets some of the cost of providing care. Another example of caring for caregivers is the Expanding Access to Retirement Savings for Caregivers Act, introduced by Representatives Tenney and Pappas. This bill provides catchup contributions to caregivers before age 50, providing 1 year of additional catchup contributions for each year the caregiver was out of employment due to their role. Nationwide supports these innovative and important considerations for workers that must take time away to provide care for a family member. Electronic Delivery, Safer and More Engaging As account interaction and communications have moved into the digital age, more and more plan participants are electing to receive plan documents electronically. Recent innovations in electronic delivery of these documents have given us the opportunity to provide critical financial planning tools and education for participants. At Nationwide, and across the industry, we have seen significantly higher engagement and better financial savings behaviors from plan participants who utilize electronic delivery and visit their accounts online. Through these methods of communication, they are able to make use of the tools and education available to them, providing them with the information that they both want and need in a timely manner. Electronic delivery also allows us to better communicate to unique populations, such as non-English speakers, people with visual impairments, or individuals that move frequently and have regular physical address changes. Each of these things, which with paper delivery create significant hurdles, is not an issue when utilizing the tools available with electronic delivery. As mentioned earlier, more people than ever are turning 65 each day in 2024. With age can come limiting factors particularly with eyesight. Receiving electronic statements and accessing account information online has benefits, not only due to information and account balances being current, but that font size can be increased or zoomed in on to make materials easier to read. The benefits of engaging with electronic delivery are clear, and at Nationwide we support efforts to make electronic delivery the default for retirement savers. Portability The reality of the workplace and employees in 2024 is that most individuals no longer remain with an employer for the entirety, or even majority, of their working life. The importance of portability of retirement benefits is one that cannot be overstated. While many in the Boomer generation, those reaching retirement or in early retirement now, remained with a single employer for most of their career, the generations following them have not continued that trend. The Defined Contribution system is built in such a way that changes in employers, careers, and even time away from the workforce do not pose significant challenges. The ease with which employees can rollover vested retirement savings into an IRA or a new employer's plan is a necessary and vital feature of the system. Changes in SECURE and SECURE 2.0 also made finding lost plans easier and raised thresholds for cash- outs, helping retirement savers to keep more of their money in long- term savings when they move from one employer to another. Research tells us that the average worker will change jobs 5 to 7 times throughout their career, with the majority of those changes occurring when they are younger and when their savings may be smaller. Finding ways to keep individuals connected to their savings is one crucial way to help them accumulate and grow those savings further. Savers Credit The tax deferral of retirement savings has and continues to be a significant incentive for workers saving for retirement. However, lower income workers have not always felt the immediate benefits of that deferral. The Savers Credit was designed to offer that incentive to retirement savers, but for those that did not have tax liability the credit did not actually help. It is vital that all participants reap the benefits of saving for retirement, so something needed to change. As part of SECURE 2.0, the Savers Credit will soon be refundable in the form of a match directly into the saver's retirement account. Nationwide applauds Chairman Wyden and his cosponsors for including this important provision in the new law. Retirement savers that meet particular income thresholds, both as single individuals or married couples, will see direct deposits from the Federal Government into their retirement account, whether that is an employer-sponsored plan or an IRA. Phase 3: Living in Retirement The goal of the third and final phase of the financial wellness journey, Living in Retirement, is for savers to experience a financially secure retirement for the remainder of their lives. Although the planning, preparation, and saving that occurred during the first two phases are critical to achieving a financially secure retirement, it is equally important that savers be equipped to make wise decisions and have the appropriate products and tools available in their retirement years to make their savings last. Income In Retirement As mentioned in the section above (In-Plan Protected Retirement Options), Nationwide is working hard to build and distribute a variety of options to retirement plan participants so that they can plan and save with confidence. Knowing that one is saving into a product that will ultimately produce a predictable, reliable stream of income in retirement takes a significant burden off of many workers as they deal with the financial needs of today and tomorrow. Not all workers currently have access to a protected retirement solution in their employer plan. Some employers do not yet offer this type of feature, some workers have a career that doesn't come with employer-sponsored benefits, but they can save in an IRA or similar type of account. These future-retirees can still access protected retirement products in the form of a qualified or nonqualified annuity which can be structured to meet a variety of income needs in retirement. Social Security Social Security is a vital part of planning for and living well in retirement. While every working American can log-in to view their my Social Security account, few do with regularity. To address this potential short-fall in planning, Ranking Member Cassidy, Senators Kaine, Collins, and Coons have introduced a bill updating Social Security Administration (SSA) standards. First, SSA would be tasked with updating the language used to describe different benefits elections schedules; changing ``early eligibility age'', ``full retirement age'', and ``delayed retirement age'' to ``minimum benefit age'', ``standard benefit age'', and ``maximum benefit age.'' We agree that this distinction will better communicate the choice being made by recipients of Social Security benefits during retirement. The bill also requires that paper statements be mailed to workers at various intervals, providing the opportunity to view estimated benefits, make corrections to wage history, and keep Social Security in mind as they plan for their future retirement. Most recordkeepers, like Nationwide, provide employer-sponsored plans with the ability to include outside benefits, like Social Security or other pension benefits in an online dashboard for planning purposes. Having a full picture of one's retirement savings and benefits is a critical piece of planning for a successful retirement. Conclusion Once more, thank you Chairman Sanders, Ranking Member Cassidy, and all Members of this Committee for holding this important hearing and for extending an invitation to Nationwide to testify. Although the journey to retirement security is one that lasts nearly a lifetime, many opportunities exist today to improve our current retirement system and make that journey less arduous for savers. We commend each of you for your ongoing, bipartisan work to improve every phase of Americans' financial wellness journey, culminating in a secure and dignified retirement. We look forward to continuing to work with you and supporting your efforts to make achieving a financially secure retirement an attainable goal for all Americans. ______  Reaching a Peak More American workers will turn 65 in 2024 than at any point in history. As these individuals reach the traditional retirement age, too many find themselves financially under-prepared. A recent survey by nationwide Retirement Institute found that as many as one-third of retirees between the ages of 60-65 are considering returning to work, with half (50 percent) citing the fear of running out of money or currently running out of money as their top reason for doing so. What We Have Done The successful passage of the SECURE Act of 2019 and SECURE 2.0 Act of 2023 opened many doors and removed many obstacles for retirement savers and for employers wanting to offer plans to their employees, particularly small business employers. Increasing access to workplace retirement plans comes in many forms, from reforming operations of pooled employer plans (PEPs), multiple employer plans (MEPs), and groups of plans, to increasing tax credits for employers offering plans. All these seemingly small changes have the ability to make a big impact by making offering plans easier for employers of all sizes. Addressing competing financial priorities for workers by offering access to various emergency savings options and providing employers the ability to match student loan payments has expanded individual employees' ability to fit retirement saving into their financial lives. We know that there are different priorities at different stages of life, so adjusting the retirement savings landscape to make room for those important issues has been very impactful. The success of auto features in the retirement space cannot be overstated. The inclusion of auto-enroll in the private sector has proven to be one of the most singularly significant improvements for individual retirement savings outcomes. Nationwide continues to work with plan sponsors to add auto-enroll and auto-escalate features to existing plans, and we applaud the requirement for all new plans to include auto-enrollment from 2024 on. Nationwide is proud to be a leader in the in-plan protected retirement space. We believe that all employers should offer an in-plan protected retirement solution, giving their employees all the opportunity to save for retirement with a guaranteed income stream. What We Can Do There are still more bipartisan opportunities to fine tune the defined contribution system, and Nationwide looks forward to working with this Committee to enact those bills into law. Improvements to the administration of Social Security, continued focus on broader access to employer-sponsored plans, tax credits for caregivers, and auto-re- enrollment are a strong lead to what can be done next. Thank you for your tireless efforts to improve the lives of America's workers as they save for and live in retirement. ______ The Chair. Thank you very much. We will begin with the questioning. At hearings like this, experts throttle on numbers, and I look at the world a little bit differently than some of our conservative economists in terms of what is happening to working families. But at the end of the day, you have got millions and millions of people who have worked their whole lives that are entering retirement and they are scared to death. And I think Ms. Schambers, your testimony was extremely moving, because I think you are not just speaking about your own life, not even about the UAW and union members, you are talking about millions and millions of people. Talk a little bit, not only for your own experience, from your friends, your family, what it is like to have worked, in your case, 17 years for one of the major corporations in America and as I understand it right now, you have no retirement program, no pension program. On a on an emotional basis, on a personal basis, what is that like? Ms. Schambers. Yes, we have a 401(k) and we got a raise in our 401k. And it is great. It is a good steppingstone, and it is a good foot forward. But when I retire, my 401(k) is based off, and the rest of America now that is in my generation, is based off of what the stock market is doing. I have seen several times in my lifetime where the stock markets went down, and we have lost a lot of money in our 401(k). I am not at retirement age, but when I look at my 401(k) and the amount of money that was bleeding out of it with the--COVID, it makes me very uneasy. It kind of feels like--especially working at Ford, I had a goalpost when I first hired in, and then it was, well, you are a temporary employee full time until further notice. So, then now---- The Chair. Explain to Members what being a ``temporary''-- you were a temporary employee for 6 years, right? Ms. Schambers. Yep. The Chair. It is a long term. What does it mean? Ms. Schambers. I was considered full time, so I worked 40, 50, 60 hours a week, but I was locked in at $14 an hour until 2013. And I was expected to do everything a full time employee did, but I didn't get any of the benefits. And I actually, when I hired in, I questioned what parts of the contract I fell under, and they said, it depends on what we are talking about. There was never any full like, here is your book. This is your rules and regulations. It is like, we are not going to cover you under that. The Chair. Okay. Thank you. Thank you very much. Ms. Ghilarducci, we are in one sense the wealthiest country in the history of the world, right, yes? A lot of billionaires out there doing very, very well. How does, in your judgment, the American retirement plan, the status of older Americans compare to people around other wealthy nations? Ms. Ghilarducci. Yes---- The Chair. Microphone. Ms. Ghilarducci. My data really looks at that question. So, I compare what people were like when they were approaching retirement 30 years ago, and then take the same snapshot of the generation that looks like them right now. As I said in my written testimony today, 50 percent will not be able to meet their retirement standards and most of them won't be able to meet poverty standard. Compare that to other countries with all different kinds of systems, the Scandinavians, the Germans, the French, even the Italians, just look at our peers and we fall way behind. I was looking at the elderly poverty rates. Kazakhstan does better than us. So, there is a couple of designs---- The Chair. I heard from some of the economists here today that they are doing just great. Things are getting better. Ms. Ghilarducci. Yes, so that was my little lesson on averages versus medians. Because the rich have done so well, they have brought up those averages that people who talk about average retirement wealth can point to. It has gone up. But that is because the top 10 percent got the benefit of retirement tax cuts. They got the benefit of the run up in the market. They didn't take money out to buy their houses. The Chair. Okay. Last question--thank you very much, sorry. Mr. Doonan, right now billionaire pays Social Security taxes on $168,000. That is about it. Massive amounts of untaxed money there despite massive income and wealth inequality. Does that make sense to you? Mr. Doonan. Thank you---- The Chair. Microphone. Mr. Doonan. Thank you for the question. I would note that one of the reasons Social Security's financing fell off track is we used to capture 90 percent of total income, and that was sort of expected to continue. But with rising inequality, I think we are down to about 82 or 81. When these projections were done in the early 80's, I feel like they did a pretty nice job. We had 40 years of level costs. But there are some areas where the projections just didn't come true. The Chair. Senator Cassidy. Senator Cassidy. I will defer to Senator Tuberville. Senator Tuberville. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, thank you for having this. This is interesting. And we all know that as Mr. Stevenson said, a lot of us are retiring. I retired a few years ago and then my wife told me, get me a damn job, so here I am today. I for 40 years paid max in Social Security, max, and, probably paid close to $1 million in Social Security. And I think I get about $3,000 a month, maybe. And by the way, Social Security, for those of you don't know, this group up here in 1983 voted to tax Social Security and then a few years later, tax it again. It is all a scam. This is all a scam. I mean, we got people that is getting ready to retire that is going to try to live off $2,000 to $3,000. Impossible. It is impossible. Because what happens, it comes up here, we spend it. We are $35 trillion in debt. We don't have any money. We are dead broke, and then taxpayers have $2 trillion in credit card debt. We are in huge trouble. In this body, we had better start figuring that out, because we are going to have a run on this city here soon, and there is going to be about 150 million people coming up here and saying, where is our damn money that we paid in. I could have put my Social Security money, 40 years--in the market. It would probably be worth $8 to 10 million today. But the Federal Government wasted it. So, I will get off my high horse there, but it is good we have this because we get, I get a pension check from education. I was part of a union. It is not going to help people. People going to work--continue to work longer and longer. Am I right, Ms. Greszler? Can you say something about Social Security, and it being taxed, for some reason? We are taxing people for the second time on Social Security that they put into an account. Ms. Greszler. Yes. And I would like to point out when Social Security was first founded, those who established it, it was started out as a 2 percent tax and they said, this will never take more than 6 percent of your income. Today it takes 12.4 percent. And depending on whether you go with CBO or Social Security trustees, it needs to take between 15.8 and 17.5 percent. We are talking about thousands of dollars more per year. It also was actually only originally recommended that the tax be up to $66,000, the equivalent in today's dollars of earnings. But over time, it has expanded massively, and the money has been spent every year. So, whereas everybody thinks this money has been set aside for me, no. For the past 13 years, every dollar that has gone out of workers' paychecks has gone immediately to pay promised benefits. And that is what happens when you have a system that enables those in charge of it to spend the money in the immediate term and leave the buck to the next generation that is coming along. Because Social Security has grown so much, it has actually to the detriment of lower income workers in particular, who have to pay such a large share of their tax, their paycheck to Social Security. They have little left to save for retirement. And then lower income, and African American workers, have the lowest life expectancies, so they are the most likely to get nothing back in return. One out of four African American men will die between the ages of 45 and 64, after having paid into this system for decades tens if not hundreds of thousands of dollars and they might get nothing back. Senator Tuberville. What is the solution? Ms. Greszler. I think we ultimately have to shift toward a universal benefits system. That is what true social insurance is. It does not make sense that we are paying the biggest benefits to the highest income earners. Gradually, over time, I think we need to bend down the benefits for the middle and upper income earners, actually increase them for the lower income earners. Look at things like indexation life retirement age to life expectancy, more accurate inflation index. I think that workers need an option to have their money in something that actually earns a positive rate of return, and that can't just immediately be spent by Congress. Senator Tuberville. I have a 28 and 29 year old, two boys. Got a job working hard, paying Social Security. They ask me all the time, dad, will I ever see any of that money? Will they see it? Ms. Greszler. I think they will see some of it. That is the exact same thing I hear whenever I ask a group of younger workers, and none of them raises their hand. So, I think that there will be something there, but it is not going to be what has been promised. Senator Tuberville. Mr. Steven, you got anything to add to that? Mr. Doonan. Thank you, Senator. What I would add is, when we talk about Social Security, we talk about pensions, the two things that they both have in common is that guaranteed income. What you are going to get, generally speaking, at the end of it. And what I referenced in terms of protected retirement, we have developed now solutions that get at both of those in a very efficient way and they also address the issue around market volatility because we have step ups and likens. It is a very efficient way to deliver that to millions of Americans that we have been talking--and that is all because of what you all did around Secure Act 1.0 and 2.0. They have put us in a position to do that. That is why I am really encouraging us to have every funded 401(k) plan, 457 plan, 403B plan at least one of those solutions, so that the American workers can choose if they want to know what they are going to get in retirement, we can deliver that for them. Senator Tuberville. Young people of all ages ask me, why can't we put our money in our own 401(k) instead of putting it in Social Security? Is there an answer to that? Mr. Doonan. I think--what I love is that they are asking the right question. Savings in any way is a good thing, and I think there is a place for Social Security, there is a place for pensions, and there is certainly a place for what we are doing with 401(k) plans. The Chair. Senator Hassan. Senator Hassan. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to you and the Ranking Member, for having this hearing. And thanks to all of our witnesses for being here today. Mr. Stevenson, I want to start with a question for you. We can increase Americans' retirement savings by supporting small businesses that offer retirement plans to their employees. That is why my colleague on this Committee, Senator Budd, and I are working to develop a bipartisan bill to improve the existing retirement plans startup tax credit. This bill would ensure that the smallest businesses receive tax cuts that fully cover the cost of starting a retirement plan. Mr. Stevenson, how can expanding retirement related tax incentives for small businesses help increase access to retirement security for their workers? And how can Congress continue to support small businesses in their efforts to provide retirement plans? Mr. Stevenson. Yes. The credits for small businesses are really important. Everything that we can do to encourage a small business to start a 401(k) plan is hugely successful. What I would add is, as a former small business owner myself, one of the things when you start a small business that you are struggling with is just there is so many things that you are wrestling with and sometimes getting to that part--you are just trying to make sure you can make payroll. Making it easy, making it just really automatic for people to set up those 401(k) plans is super important as well. Senator Hassan. Thank you. Another question for you, Mr. Stevenson. Since 2019, Congress has twice passed into law bipartisan legislation to increase access to retirement savings options, particularly for military spouses, part time workers, and student loan borrowers. However, 57 million Americans still do not have access to a workplace retirement plan. Mr. Stevenson, how can Congress continue to build on this bipartisan momentum to increase access to retirement options? Mr. Stevenson. Yes. Again, Secure Act 1.0 and 2.0, it is just huge in terms of momentum and what they have done to create more access. I think we are on the right track. What we need to do now and hold us accountable in terms of on this side of the table, is we have got to make sure that people are taking advantage of those benefits that you have already provided. That they are utilizing those--there is a lot out there. 2.0 just passed and we are working on that, but that is the--I think you have just--you are on the right track. We have done so much, and we have just got to keep pushing on that path. Senator Hassan. Well, and it will be helpful for us to understand as 2.0 is getting implemented, what challenges we are seeing and what other changes we can make to just make it easier and easier for Americans to save earlier and earlier in their careers. Ms. Schambers, I want to turn to you, and I want to thank you very much for your testimony. It is really meaningful. It is really important. I also wanted to talk specifically about the impact that working--that motherhood has on working women and on their capacity to save for retirement. According to a recent Department of Labor report, mothers lose an average of nearly $240,000 in income over their lifetime as a result of the time that they spend caring for their kids. This lost income in turn reduces a mother's retirement savings by nearly $60,000. We obviously have to do more to help moms and help caregivers so that they can retire with dignity. As I understand it, Ms. Schambers, you have two children. Is that right? How has your experience been trying to both care for your kids and save for retirement? Ms. Schambers. Thank you for the question because it is really important with having children to be able to say, I know when I can leave my career and I know that I can still provide. When the cost of living goes up, so does babysitting. So does daycare. So does everything else in this world. And until this recent strike, our wages were way behind, right. And on top of that, when school is out or daycares out, you have to take time off work in order to stay home with your children. Any of the 401(k) that I am putting into, whether I am off for a day or 6 weeks with my children, I am not putting into my 401(k) daily. On top of that, it is maxed at 40 hours. So, if I work 60 hours, I am only putting--I am only allowed to, or the company only matches up to 40 hours of what I work. If I don't work that 40 hours, I am already behind. Senator Hassan. Got it. Yes, yes. Thank you very much. And again, thank you very much for your testimony. Thanks, Mr. Chair. The Chair. Thank you. Senator Cassidy. Senator Cassidy. Yes. Thank you. Hey, thank you all for being here. I think we share a concern. How do we improve retirement not for Elon Musk, but for kind of the folks who are at the low end. Mr. Ghilarducci, you and--sir, can I ask your indulgence? He just showed up. Can we restart and let me defer to him? Oh, Okay. Never mind. So, but really, the two of you, Ms. Greszler and Ms. Ghilarducci, are saying different things. You made the point that it is the lowest portion that is just having the hardest time. But you mentioned, Ms. Greszler that your statistic, I wrote it down, 50 percent of those just getting by has decreased by one half percent, and that income is 123 percent of pre-retirement income. Can you respond, and then I will ask you to respond. Ms. Greszler. Yes, I would love to because we have heard some widely different statistics here. The difference is looking at survey based data which just asks individuals what their income is versus administrative data, such as IRS tax records, what people have actually reported on their taxes. Economists will tell you that the IRS data is the most accurate for multiple reasons. First of all, you are less accurate to lie on your taxes, but also the way that the survey data is asked, things like, defined contribution plan that you might not take a regular amount out every month will not show up. There has been studies done that showed the median female in retirement looks like she has 45 percent less income than she actually does based on that survey data when you compare it to the actual IRS tax records. You will see in page three of my testimony here, there is a study that is using those IRS panel data and 123 percent replacement at the median, 93 percent replacement. So, most people on their tax records appear to have significant income in retirement security. Senator Cassidy. Ms. Ghilarducci, can you briefly respond to that? Ms. Ghilarducci. That study is old. The CPS has been corrected for that. I use a much more comprehensive study from the University of Michigan that looks at what happens when people live their lives after they have filed all their taxes, went through their life course, and right on the verge of retirement, how much they have. That has been double checked with IRS data, with administrative records. And I stand by my written testimony, the bottom half have barely anything. The middle, $200,000. The top have almost $1 million. Senator Cassidy. Ms. Greszler, any last words, real quickly? Ms. Greszler. I mean, the data are available on the internet. You can look them up--better research---- Senator Cassidy. Yes. Let me go, Mr. Doonan, great talking to your group yesterday. Thank you for your hospitality. Now, you mentioned the defined benefit, and now some employers are going back to it. You mentioned IBM, but I think of IBM as having relatively stable employment. But when I look here it says that the average number of jobs someone holds in a 6-year period from 18 to 24 is 5.7, an average of 4.5 from 25 to 34, and 2.9 from 35 to 44. It does seem like our current job market people move a lot, and the defined contribution allows you to take that with you, as opposed to what I have to vest for 5 years before I qualify, which is what we do in the Federal Government. If you are not here for 5 years, you don't vest. So, that does seem to be a major advantage of a defined contribution as opposed to a defined benefit. Mr. Doonan. Thank you. And I think younger workers have always been more prone to move around and switch jobs, and sort of find that---- Senator Cassidy. But this shows even, but if you will, kind of in the 30's workers are moving around--2.9 times. Mr. Doonan. Yes, yes. And I also think there is a bit of a chicken and egg thing, right. Private employers moved away from incentivizing careers, and we see less people having longer careers. In contrast, the public sector has maintained that stable workforce incentivizing careers. It is not uncommon to walk into a school and see a teacher who is--put in 20 years in that school. So I think to the extent that there actually are changes because I think there has always been turnover the incentives have changed dramatically. Senator Cassidy. In your mind that if we had a defined benefit, people would be more likely to stay with their job? Mr. Doonan. Yes. Senator Cassidy. Now, I will say that whenever I read of a large number of like Meta is laying off a bunch of people, is often not the worker's choice, it is the employers choice, just to point that out. Mr. Stevenson, I think Ms. Schambers is kind of pointing out to the anxiety of an investor who is dependent upon her retirement about the kind of, the stock market moving up and down. It is one thing if you have a cushion, but it is another-- in your experience, and it is another of kind of, oh my gosh, I am 10 years away. You mentioned, the terms you used, step up and lock in. Now, I am guessing that just from what I am hearing from, is that would be a way to deal with the anxiety of that small investor. Can you elaborate? Mr. Doonan. Yes. Absolutely. That is--you have got it exactly right. And again, it is really taking the best of what the pension world had to offer and bringing that into defined contribution plans. Yes, we have developed, and the number of my peers have developed solutions that address that issue 100 percent. And what I love about these is we still know that 60 percent of Americans don't have an advisor, right. That probably goes without saying. So, but what we are describing is making these available inside of 457 plans or 401(k) plans, you get them at an institutional level, and you get the oversight that comes from a major corporation or small corporation or an expert manager---- Senator Cassidy. You got to wrap up because he is tapping the thing, but I think you have made your point. And, Mr. Chair, can I ask unanimous consent to enter into the record statements from the following groups, the American Benefits Council, the ERISA Industry Committee, the American Council of Life Insurers, the Insurer Retirement Institute, IRA, and the American Retirement Association. The Chair. Without objection.  The Chair. Senator Casey. Senator Casey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks for the hearing. Wanted to thank in particular our witnesses for your testimony and the expertise you bring to the hearing. I don't think there is anyone in this room that doesn't understand the scope of this problem, and especially after the testimony, of how important it is to have enough savings for all of life's needs, no matter where a person lives, no matter what their circumstances. That, of course, includes retirement. We know that secure retirement--reliable pensions have been phased out by major corporations over time that, in my judgment, are increasingly cutting costs on the backs of workers. This has contributed to some devastating data with regard to retirement savings and the gaps therein. Professor Ghilarducci, I wanted to start with you about your--the findings that you cite in your testimony about, and I want to make sure I have this right, half of Americans nearing retirement, ages 51 to 64, have no wealth in retirement accounts. Is that true? Ms. Ghilarducci. That is true. Senator Casey. Also, that same group, meaning ages 51 to 64, have no home equity. Half don't. Ms. Ghilarducci. That is true too. And that is because our debt creating institutions have overwhelmed our wealth creating institutions for most American workers. Student loans, HELOCs, no down payments for your house, credit card debt, babysitting money. The ability to take money out of your retirement account. That is the account of first resort. It should be the account of no resort until you retire. So, our wealth institutions have not worked for most Americans. Senator Casey. I wanted to talk to you about a bill that I have introduced to confront part of the problem. It is called the 401 Kids Savings Account Act to help at least begin to reverse these trends. This bill automatically creates savings accounts at birth for all children, all children in the country, with Federal support for low and moderate income families, and then starting when that child reaches the age of 18, funds can be used for higher education, can be used to start a small business, or first home or retirement. Starting to save at birth also means families can put the market to work for them, leading to compound savings and greater assets later in life. To illustrate this in one particular example, the Aspen Institute found that starting savings at birth rather than at age 32, when a typical family start saving for retirement, results in an additional $473,000 for retirement. That is what our 401 Kids plan can achieve. I wanted to ask you about that and also ask Mr. Stevenson or others about the importance of building savings starting at birth. Ms. Ghilarducci. Yes. I can quote Einstein who said the power of compound interest was one of the most powerful forces on Earth. And it works the other way. Debt, if you compound debt and you have debt when you start off, it can compound the other way. So, it is a really good plan. We should start with wealth and accumulate it. Senator Casey. Mr. Stevenson. Mr. Stevenson. Senator, what I would add is, we encourage savings at any rate, at any level. What I would add is if we auto enrolled everyone at age 21 when they graduated from college, we wouldn't have a crisis either. We would make huge progress. Just getting people started at 21 versus 31, captures a vast majority of the number that you quoted. Senator Casey. Mr. Doonan, and I am getting close to running out of time. But, Mr. Doonan, what is your sense of this in terms of the importance of starting savings at birth? Mr. Doonan. I think when you look at a retirement system it is too common to start at age 40. You have the short timeframe. You don't have the opportunity for investment returns to support the cost of retirement. Starting earlier obviously makes the math work much better. I think it could help with some equity issues possibly help-- relieve some financial pressure stress, that sort of thing too. Thank you. Senator Casey. Thanks very much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Chair. Thank you. Senator Braun. Senator Braun. I want to ask Ms. Ghilarducci and Greszler this question. Does it ever make sense to borrow money, to consume, to spend? Start over with Miss---- Ms. Ghilarducci. Yes, sure. There is good debt. Senator Braun. Not to--I am saying to spend it. To consume it as opposed to invest in it. There is a big difference there. So, go back to that question, does it ever make sense to borrow money to spend it in the present for something that is other than an investment? Ms. Ghilarducci. Rarely. Senator Braun. Rarely. What about you? Ms. Greszler. Only if it is going to produce--return over time. Essentially like an---- Senator Braun. That is an investment--yes, you just flipped it to an investment, so. I would like to propose this piece of information. When we came out of WWII, we had the highest debt in the history of our Country. But that was the greatest generation. They grew up in the depression. They fought WWII. We somehow ended up paying off all that debt, building the interstate highway system. Begs the question, how much of what ails us today when we even display it through our own Federal Government, that we are a society that wants to live in the present to where you are not investing for the future. Here I will point out in the institution that wants to be the backstop for some of this stuff we are talking about, it would be wonderful if we could do it. It was 5 years ago when I got here, we were borrowing $1 trillion a year. Now it is $1 trillion every 6 months. Not to mention, somebody, I think you did earlier, Social Security goes broke in 9 years. Medicare in about four or five and we don't fix even that. So, aren't we kind of missing the main issue that maybe as a country, as a society, we have lost sight of actually what builds for a good future? My point would be that you need to become savers and investors inherently, rather than consumers and spenders, which we become as a society, and through Government. Ms. Ghilarducci, comment on that, and then Ms. Greszler. Ms. Ghilarducci. No, I think you got a right. I mean, the Government and businesses are really good investors--you can-- the Government and businesses---- Senator Braun. The Government is a good investor? Ms. Ghilarducci. Absolutely. You just told me the highway bill. Senator Braun. That is a tangible project. Ms. Ghilarducci. Yes. Senator Braun. You got an asset, and I agree there, infrastructure. Ms. Ghilarducci. Human capital, big investor in education. That has a rate of return. So, I am with you. Senator Braun. But have we gone too far on a variety of subjects to be credible as a place that could come in and try to fix the same thing we are talking about that we are abusing here? Ms. Ghilarducci. I don't buy in on the abuse, but we are together on the borrowing you do as a Government should be an investment. Absolutely. Senator Braun. Okay. Ms. Greszler. I would disagree that the Government is a good investor. I don't think it is. And it would be wonderful to talk about having children be able to start retiring day one, but we have the exact opposite. As you pointed out, debt is the reverse of compound interest. So, we have children being born in--already, they are immediately burdened with $100,000 or more in debt that they are going to have to pay off in the future. The best thing that policymakers can do to create a brighter future for every generation is to not burden them with that debt. Senator Braun. Agree 100 percent. And I think, it is kind of sanctimonious to be talking about it from here, when we would be the greatest example that is kind of abused, the whole equation of not trying to borrow money to live in the present. It is always a bad business plan. Ms. Greszler, we have got a situation back in Indiana, there is actually an act called the Susan Muffley Act, which was an example of back when Government did step in, it picked winners and losers. Again, this had to do with an automotive industry to where certain folks got bailed out, some didn't. It begs the question, too, of when we do step in, can we be in the business of picking winners and losers? Even if we do want to do that, are we financially in a position to pick any winner or loser in our current shape? Ms. Greszler. Yes, I think this is a perfect example of how, when we do have these systems that are broken and the Government steps in and bails out some and not others, that is absolutely unfair. The situation with the Delphi workers, those who were unionized, got bailed out. They got $1 billion as a package of what was at least $17 billion bailout for the UAW and the big three, without which older workers' pensions would not be there today. Now we have a situation unionized, you got $1 billion. Same company, non-unionized, they have gotten nothing. 90 percent of the workforce is not unionized. Senator Braun. Well, thank you. My time is up. I will part with this statement, never borrow money to consume it. Get good at investing. Your future will be better off. And I wouldn't count on this place fixing it until we get our own house in order. The Chair. Senator Kaine. Senator Kaine. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thanks to the witnesses. We do things all the time that benefit some people and not others. I mean, the notion that doing good for some people is not a good thing to do because you didn't do a good for everybody-- every program that we work on usually has some target audience, and then it may not benefit other people, and then we figure out other programs to benefit them. The notion that we helped people preserve pensions, but it was a bad idea because we didn't help everybody preserve a pension. The American Rescue Plan, we acted as part of that, and it passed by one vote in the Senate, one vote, and protected the pensions of 2 million workers. That followed up an earlier vote that we did to protect the pension of United Mine Workers and that number was smaller but that is a good thing. By protecting those pensions, we actually protect others' pensions as well because it is less likely that those 2 million, the failure of those pension plans would drive down the funding levels of the PBGC, and so others who had pensions that weren't necessarily protected are going to end up more protected as well. Mr. Chair, I know you probably felt the same way. There can be a lot of frustrating days around here, but there have been three times when I have been here where something has happened by one vote. Saving the Affordable Care Act happened by one vote. The American Rescue Plan, 2 million workers' pensions happened by one vote. The Inflation Reduction Act, cutting prescription drug costs and advancing a clean energy economy, happened by one vote. There are some days where you wonder why you are here. On the days where something happens by one vote, you think, wow, I am really glad that I decided to seek office and be in this place, because sometimes it is just about one person standing up. A couple of items I want to emphasize, and these are some items I am working on with Senator Cassidy. First is auto enrollment--auto re-enrollment. We have a bill, the Auto Re- enrollment bill, that would periodically sweep people in and have them enroll in their company's plans and give them the ability to opt out. It is similar to what we do with health insurance. We are always kind of every year jogging you about health insurance and kind of making you think, do you have the right plan, or do you want to switch? If we could do that more often on the retirement options that our employees have with employers, I think it would be a great thing. I think it is a bipartisan proposal that I would like us to do. The second one I want to focus on is young workers. This statistic kind of surprised me. 2.7 million Americans between the ages of 18 and 20 work full time hours, 2.7 million Americans, but 40 percent of workplace retirement plans set a minimum age threshold of 21 to be able to participate in retirement plans. We ought to change that to 18. We ought to have workplace retirement plans pick up 18, 19, and 20 year olds that are working and include them in retirement as well. The Helping Young Americans Save for Retirement Act is something that Senator Cassidy and I are also working on. I think, again, it is noncontroversial and bipartisan. And then the last thing I will just say, and I am one of these people that is trying to do four hearings today, so I am going to defer some time back, employee stock ownership. If you want to talk about retirement security, the 10 million Americans that work at ESOPs end up with some powerful retirement security. And ESOPs predominated in some unusual industries. For some reason, the construction and kind of contracting industry has been--but increasingly, you see it in retail. Increasingly you see it in some hospitality industries. If we can continue to promote ESOPs through our tax code or through other strategies, I think that is an element in retirement security that can be really, really helpful for American workers. And with that, Mr. Chair, I yield back. The Chair. Thank you. Senator Budd. Senator Budd. Thank you, Chairman. Congress has provided explicit instructions to the Department of Labor on numerous occasions about how to encourage Americans to save for their retirement. However, the DOL's current fiduciary rule, proposal directly contradicts these directives. If implemented, it will further restrict access, increase costs to consumers, limit personalized financial advice, and only allow consideration of very basic investment products. This approach toward retirement investors, it is incompatible with the current system where individual retirement savers are able to make decisions for themselves. Mr. Stevenson, do you believe the DOL's proposal is counterproductive to the great bipartisan work in the Secure Act and Secure Act 2.0? Mr. Stevenson. It is a great question. And one of the things that we have sort of talked around today is financial literacy, right, more education, more training. In general, we know that financial literacy doesn't work. We have all done tons of programs. And so, that's why auto enroll, auto escalate, all those things are just so powerful. As it relates to the DOL piece, it is such a broad, sweeping piece of legislation or proposal. It will take our eye off the ball for a long time and our ability to implement all that you have done around Security 1.0 and 2.0. It will stop a lot of the things that we are working on that are so positive, that are so bipartisan, and it is a major distraction, and it is a major expense that--those expenses will flow to places that we won't like. Senator Budd. It sounds like a bad idea. Mr. Stevenson, would you agree with the sentiment that in a time when folks are living longer, inflation is rampant, and there is a need to start saving more and saving earlier for retirement, that this rule would leave people worse off? Mr. Stevenson. It certainly has the potential. There is some challenging parts to it. And again, I would just stick to the point around there is so much power that you we have created in Secure Act 2.0, and expanding access, expanding-- making it easier for small business to do those things that we want them to do. Young savers, student loan matching, if we implement those things, we are going to make a huge, huge dent in the challenges we have all talked about today, and that rule will really put that at risk for a few years. Senator Budd. Let's talk for a minute, Mr. Stevenson, about issues that will help my constituents and folks across the country with retirement instead of hurting them, as this rule is likely to do. Secure 2.0, it had several incentives to help small businesses cover startup costs associated with an employment retirement plans. While these bipartisan measures were important, a simple miscalculation means that the tax credit doesn't work for the smallest of businesses out there. I am working with Senator Hassan to introduce the Senate companion to the bipartisan Rise Act. And what this bill does, it addresses that miscalculation to help offset the smallest businesses and allows them to offer retirement plans to their employees. Do you have a positive outlook on whether tax credits like these will actually help boost retirement savings for people? Mr. Stevenson. They absolutely will. Senator Budd. Can you explain that a little bit? Mr. Stevenson. Well, it is just so many Americans work in small companies and everything that we can do to remove the barrier from a business owner to launching their own 401(k) plan and making that available to all their employees is going to be helpful. There is just--we have proven that time and time again, especially with the other features around auto enroll, auto escalate, that is the pattern, right. Make it easy for the business to set it up and then make it easy for the employee to participate. Senator Budd. That is very helpful. Thank you Chairman, I yield. The Chair. Thank you, Senator Budd. All right, I think that is about it. I think on behalf of the whole Committee, I want to thank all of the panelists. I think we can--may have strong disagreements about solutions, but we can all agree this is a serious problem. Needs discussion, and I think we have begun that today. Let me thank everybody for being here. That is the end of our hearing today. For any Senators who wish to ask additional questions, questions for the record will be due in 10 business days, March 13th, 5.00 p.m. Finally, I ask unanimous consent to enter the record ten statements from stakeholders outlining their pension and retirement priorities. So ordered.  The Chair. The Committee stands adjourned. Thank you all very much. ADDITIONAL MATERIAL AARP AARP appreciates the opportunity to comment for the record on the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions hearing to discuss the retirement savings crisis in America. At AARP, we work very hard to expand workplace retirement coverage and empower Americans to save and give them the tools they need to ensure they have a more secure retirement. According to the Federal Reserve's 2022 Economic Well-Being of Households Survey, only 31 percent of non-retirees thought their retirement saving was on track, down from 40 percent in 2021. \1\ We applaud the Committee for holding this hearing to explore solutions to ensure that future generations will be able to retire with dignity. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \1\ Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, ``Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2022,'' May 2023, https:// www.Federalreserve.gov/publications/files/2022-report-economic-well- being-us-households-202305.pdf. While there are many ways to address the retirement challenges that America faces, as this hearing will explore, AARP will focus on three areas where we hope to work with Congress and the Administration to improve retirement outcomes in this country: expanding access to retirement savings plans, ensuring protections and support for those with defined benefit plans, and closing retirement advice loopholes that allow conflicted advice to eat away at retirement savings. (A) A Lack of Access to Retirement Savings Plans has Exacerbated the Retirement Crisis in America Contributing to this crisis has been a significant shift in how Americans save for retirement. The share of workers with defined benefit plans has significantly declined. Defined contribution plans now hold the largest portion of retirement assets. \2\ This trend away from defined benefit plans has shifted the onus of saving for retirement away from employers onto employees, who are now responsible for saving and investment decisions. Many workers do not even have an option to save for retirement through their employers. In fact, nearly half of American workers ages 18 to 64 in the private sector work for businesses that do not offer any type of retirement plan. \3\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \2\ CRS, ``A Visual Depiction of the Shift from Defined Benefit (DB) to Defined Contribution (DC) Pension Plans in the Private Sector, December 27, 2021, https://crsreports.Congress.gov/product/pdf/IF/ IF12007. \3\ David John, Gary Koenig, and Marissa Malta, ``Payroll Deduction Retirement Programs Build Economic Security,'' July 2022, https://www.aarp.org/content/dam/aarp/ppi/2022/07/payroll-deduction- retirement-programs-build-economic-security.doi.10.26419- 2Fppi.00164.001.pdf. The smaller the employer, the less likely its workers are to have access to a retirement plan. About 78 percent of those who work in firms with fewer than 10 employees and about 65 percent who work in companies with 10 to 24 employees lack a plan. However, even among very large employers with more than 1,000 workers, over one-third of employees do not have access to an employer-sponsored retirement plan. \4\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \4\ Ibid. While about three out of four workers with less than a high school degree do not have an employer-provided retirement plan--a much higher percentage than workers with some college (50 percent) or a bachelor's degree or higher (32 percent), the lack of coverage affects employees at all earnings levels. About 81 percent (46 million workers out of 57 million total) with annual earnings of $50,000 or less do not have access to an employer-provided retirement plan. In addition, almost 11 million more employees earning $50,000 or more do not have access to a workplace plan. \5\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \5\ Ibid. Access to a plan differs substantially by race, ethnicity, and gender. About 64 percent of Hispanic workers, 53 percent of Black workers, and 45 percent of Asian American workers lack access to an employer-provided retirement plan. Together, these employees account for about 46 percent (26 million) of the 57 million without such a plan. In addition, 46 percent of all men and 49 percent of all women do not have access to an employer-provided plan. \6\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \6\ Ibid. Congress is currently considering several pieces of legislation that would expand coverage, including the Retirement Savings for Americans Act of 2023, which would provide those employees without an employer-sponsored retirement savings plan with access to an account managed through the Federal Government, and the Automatic IRA Act of 2024, which would expand retirement plan coverage to millions of workers who do not currently have employer-sponsored retirement plans. \7\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \7\ S. 3102, the Retirement Savings for Americans Act of 2023, https://www.Congress.gov/bill/118th-congress/senate-bill/3102; H.R. 7293, the Automatic IRA Act of 2024, https://www.Congress.gov/bill/ 118th-congress/house-bill/7293. Efforts to expand retirement savings coverage have been very successful at the state level. AARP's advocacy has been key in helping 19 states pass legislation to make it easier for workers to save money for retirement out of their regular paychecks who otherwise wouldn't have access to a retirement plan at their workplace. In total, these state programs are now utilized by 820,000 workers, 207,000 employers, and have $1.2 billion in assets under management. \8\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \8\ Andy Markowitz and Jacqueline Salmon, ``How Auto IRAs Are Helping More Workers Save for Retirement,'' January 8, 2024, https:// www.aarp.org/retirement/planning-for-retirement/info-2023/states-with- automatic-ira-savings-programs.html. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- (B) Ensuring Support for Retirees With Defined Benefit Plans After years of advocacy, AARP applauded Congress for strengthening protections for underfunded multiemployer pension plans when Congress passed the American Rescue Plan Act, which included the Butch Lewis Emergency Pension Plan Relief Act. AARP had long heard from its members who were the participants and beneficiaries of pensions at risk of significant benefit reductions due in part to changes in the economy and fewer contributing employers. Retirees, who rely on these benefits for their retirement income, faced dramatic and often devastating cuts due to no fault of their own. The Butch Lewis Emergency Pension Plan Relief Act enabled the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation to support the workers and retirees in 100 to 200 severely underfunded multiemployer plans that cover millions of retirees and family members. The legislation will put many of these at-risk multiemployer pension plans on more sound financial footing for decades to come, sparing cuts to participants and beneficiaries, and ensuring the defined benefit plans they relied on throughout their working years will be there to support them throughout their retirement years. We urge Congress to continue supporting retirees in multiemployer plans through the implementation of the Special Funding Assistance program and protecting all current defined benefit plan participants through the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation. It is vital we protect the benefits that workers have spent a lifetime working toward and earning so that promised benefits will be there in retirement. (C) Close Retirement Advice Loopholes That Allow Conflicted Advice to Eat Away at Retirement Savings One of the most important parts of coverage is ensuring that workers' retirement savings are maximized and not eaten away by inappropriate fees and commissions charged by some bad actors. When Americans seek out financial advice for their retirement savings, they expect the advice they get will be in their best interest, not in the best interest of their financial advisor. In fact, people are generally quite surprised to learn that not all financial professionals are required to put their clients' financial best interests before their own. This is why the recently proposed Retirement Security Rule from the Labor Department is so important. This proposal would require financial professionals providing advice to retirement savers to put their clients' best interests before their own. Families need to be able to trust the advice they get from financial advisors. Regulatory loopholes allow some financial advisers to recommend their clients invest their retirement savings in products simply because the adviser will get higher fees and commissions for doing so. This conflicted advice eats into retirement savings, and lessens peoples' ability to retire securely, ultimately resulting in further costs to state and Federal budgets. According to a December 2023 poll conducted by AARP, 89 percent of adults 50+ say that they expect professional financial advice to be in their best interest, and a similarly large share (87 percent) say that they use professional financial advice to make important financial decisions. Further, 90 percent agree that financial professionals should be required to give advice in the best interest of the retirement savings account holder. In fact, two-thirds (66 percent) of adults ages 50-plus say that they would be less likely to vote for their Member of Congress if they were to overturn a rule requiring financial professionals to provide advice in the best interest of their clients. \9\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \9\ AARP Research, ``Unbiased Financial Advice About Retirement Is Important to Older Adults,'' January 2, 2024, https://www.aarp.org/pri/ topics/work-finances-retirement/financial-security-retirement/ fiduciary-duty-retirement/. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- This Proposal Is Critical to Closing Existing Regulatory Gaps and Providing Retirement Savers the Protections They Deserve When the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) was enacted in 1974, individual retirement accounts had just been introduced, and 401(k) plans were not yet a reality. At that time, the primary method of ensuring retirement security was through Defined Benefit plans, commonly known as traditional pensions. These pensions offered a guaranteed income for retirees that was designed to last throughout their retirement. They were advantageous because they pooled assets and were managed by a fiduciary, leading to cost efficiencies and pooled risk. With the shift from pensions to individual accounts that has occurred over the past 50 years, the onus of retirement planning has largely fallen on individuals. They must navigate complex financial products and depend on professional advice, which unfortunately isn't always provided with their best interests at heart. This has frequently left individuals with the ultimate responsibility for assessing economic and market risks, sifting through complex financial products, and determining contribution levels, all over a decades-long time horizon. Currently, the advice retirement savers receive from their financial professionals about their retirement investments may not align with their best interests. This situation can lead to excessive fees, investments in underperforming or illiquid assets, and unnecessary risks. \10\ According to some estimates, this conflicted advice can cost retirement savers up to 20 percent of their retirement savings over a lifetime. \11\ Such circumstances are untenable, potentially delaying retirement or diminishing living standards post- retirement. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \10\ Retirement Security Rule: Definition of an Investment Advice Fiduciary, RIN 1210-AC02 (Oct. 24, 2024) (``Fiduciary Release'') (``Overall, evidence demonstrates that the combination of inexpert customers and conflicted advisers results in investment underperformance and negative outcomes for investors. According to a 2015 report by the Council of Economic Advisers, approximately $1.7 trillion of IRA assets were invested in products with a payment structure that generates conflicts of interests. A substantial body of research has shown that IRA holders receiving conflicted investment advice can expect their investments to underperform by approximately 50 to 100 basis points per year.''), https://www.dol.gov/sites/dolgov/ files/ebsa/temporary-postings/retirement-security-rule-definition-of- an-investment-advice-fiduciary.pdf. \11\ The White House, ``FACT SHEET: President Biden to Announce New Actions to Protect Retirement Security by Cracking Down on Junk Fees in Retirement Investment Advice,'' October 31, 2023, https:// www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2023/10/31/fact- sheet-president-biden-to-announce-new-actions-to-protect-retirement- security-by-cracking-down-on-junk-fees-in-retirement-investment-advice/. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- The Department of Labor Proposal Will Address Existing Regulatory Loopholes and Provide Retirement Savers with Essential Protections The proposed Department of Labor rule proposal addresses the many regulatory loopholes that result in retirement savers receiving conflicted advice that affects their long-term financial security and ability to retire with dignity. When implemented, the rule will help to ensure workers have access to high-quality advice and aims to eliminate conflicted advice, both of which are essential in the current retirement landscape. The proposed rule would create uniform fiduciary standards to safeguard retirees and their hard-earned assets. It proposes a ``best interests'' standard for investment advice, broadening the scope of what constitutes an investment recommendation. This change is crucial in empowering workers to effectively manage the increased responsibility and risk associated with saving for retirement. This proposal is a balanced approach, reflecting significant changes in our retirement system since 1975. It would address loopholes in existing regulations that allow financial professionals to take advantage of their clients and recommend they invest in ill-suited, high-fee products by focusing on the expectations of retirees--that their financial advisers will put their clients' best interests before their own. It aligns with standards set by other regulators, notably the Securities and Exchange Commission's (SEC) Regulation Best Interest (Reg BI) and puts forth the necessary consumer protections for retirement savers. First, the proposal will do what Congress expected, and provide a uniform standard for those falling within the definition of investment advice fiduciary. In adopting ERISA, Congress sought to implement ``uniform fiduciary standards'' designed to ``prevent transactions which dissipate or endanger'' retirement assets. \12\ Those providing investment advice for compensation would be subject to the best interests standard when retirees expect and trust that this is the case. The uniform standard would apply to advice providers who hold themselves out as fiduciaries, exercise discretionary control over retirement assets, or are in the business of making such recommendations on a regular and particularized basis. \12\ Statement by Hon. Harrison A. Williams, Jr., Chairman, Senate Committee on Labor and Public Welfare, introducing the Conference Report on H.R. 2, 120 Congressional Record S. 15737 (August 22,1974) (``the legislation imposes strict fiduciary obligations on those who have discretion or responsibility respecting the management, handling, or disposition of pension or welfare plan assets. The objectives of these provisions are to make applicable the law of trusts; to prohibit exculpatory clauses that have often been used in this field; to establish uniform fiduciary standards to prevent transactions which dissipate or endanger plan assets; and to provide affective remedies for breaches of trust.''). Second, it closes a glaring loophole that allows some advisors to offer very bad advice to their clients, as long as they only do it once. The current, outdated regulation creates a ``one time'' exception, which is not in the statute Congress passed. So an advisor can give advice to convert the entire balance of your retirement savings and not have to do that in a retiree's best interest, simply because it was one single recommendation rather than a series of recommendations. No senior would expect that making such a substantive and critical decision would somehow be exempted from basic consumer --------------------------------------------------------------------------- protections. Third, the proposal would fill gaps in the existing regulatory regime by better aligning the Labor Department's approach with what other regulators have already done. The proposal is very similar to the SEC's Reg BI, which governs the standards applicable to broker-dealers when dealing with retail clients. The proposal will apply the best interests standard to recommendations concerning plan distributions, decisions not to engage in transactions, and investment strategies. Fourth, the definition of ``recommendation'' will explicitly include rollovers, even when not accompanied by a specific recommendation concerning the investment of the assets. \13\ Those deciding on whether to pull assets from a retirement plan and put them in an IRA will know that the recommendation must be in their best interests. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \13\ Fiduciary Release, supra note 4 (``The Department continues to believe that advice provided in connection with a rollover decision, even if not accompanied by a specific recommendation on how to invest assets, should be treated as fiduciary investment advice.''). Fifth, the effect of fine-print disclaimers will be limited. Under the proposal, disclaimers will not automatically control an investment advice fiduciary's status, at least where inconsistent with ``the person's oral communications, marketing materials, applicable state or Federal law, or other interactions with the retirement investor.'' Where such an inconsistency arises, the disclaimer will be ``insufficient to defeat the retirement investor's legitimate --------------------------------------------------------------------------- expectations.'' Finally, the proposal also makes clear that platform providers have the same duty, at least where they make specific recommendations about the securities to be offered. As the Labor Department knows, small employers often are sold such platforms with representations that the platform will satisfy the employer's fiduciary obligations. Criticisms of the Proposed Rule are Based on Questionable Research and Claims Those opposing this important and commonsense rule have made baseless claims and do not support a requirement to put their clients' best interests before their own financial interests. We would like to dispel any misconceptions about the proposal. Some have argued that this rule is not necessary, as the SEC's Reg BI has already addressed all conflicts of interest in financial advising. This is not true. Under Reg BI, implemented in 2019, broker- dealers registered with the SEC are subject to a ``best interests'' requirement. \14\ Reg BI, however, has limited application. First, it only applies to retail investors and therefore does not extend to all recommendations made to retirement plans. For another, the standard applies only to ``investment securities.'' As a result, the standard does not generally include such investments as real estate, certificates of deposit, certain insurance products, or commodities. Even more complex, the same investment may or may not be a security depending upon the circumstances, such as gold coins or interests in limited liability companies. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \14\ Securities and Exchange Commission, ``Regulation Best Interest: The Broker-Dealer Standard of Conduct, Exchange Act Release No 86031,'' June 5, 2019 (effective Sept. 10, 2019), https:// www.sec.gov/files/rules/final/2019/34-86031.pdf. Annuities further illustrate the complexity. Variable annuities are subject to the Federal securities laws; fixed annuities are not. The status of fixed index annuities, according to the SEC, ``may or may not'' be a security. \15\ Broker-dealers providing recommendations on an array of annuities could find themselves subject to Reg BI for some of them but not others. And in the case of fixed index annuities, even the advice provider may not be sure whether the best interests standard applies. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \15\ See Annuities, Investor.gov, SEC, last visited Nov. 27, 2023, https://www.investor.gov/introduction-investing/investing-basics/ glossary/annuities (``Variable annuities are securities regulated by the SEC. An indexed annuity may or may not be a security; however, most indexed annuities are not registered with the SEC. Fixed annuities are not securities and are not regulated by the SEC.''). Some have argued that the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) Model Rule is sufficient regulation for the insurance industry--despite its gaping limitations. The NAIC Model Rule--which states adopt voluntarily, and which has not been adopted by all states--would impose some obligations on those selling fixed annuities. However, while the NAIC uses the words ``best interests'', it does not reflect a ``best interests'' standard. For example, it does not apply to all annuities or other insurance products, and it excludes cash and non-cash compensation in determining material conflicts (which is the very source of many conflicts). \16\ It is clear this Model Rule does not provide consumers with sufficient protections and falls far short of the protections generally included in plans covered by ERISA. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \16\ See National Association of Insurance Commissioners, ``Suitability in Annuity Transactions Model Regulation,'' Spring 2020, https://content.naic.org/sites/default/files/inline-files/MDL-275.pdf, (``Section 6. Duties of Insurers and Producers . . .(A)(1)(d) ``The requirements under this subsection do not create a fiduciary obligation or relationship and only create a regulatory obligation as established in this regulation." And Section 5(I)(2) ````Material conflict of interest'' does not include cash compensation or non-cash compensation.''''). Recommendations to rollover plan assets into an IRA likewise may or may not be subject to a best interests standard under the current regulation's 5-part test. This is true even though the ``decision to roll over assets from a plan to an IRA is often the single most important financial decision a plan participant makes, involving a lifetime of retirement savings'' and the fact that these recommendations ``carry with them an inherent conflict of interest.'' \17\ And while rollovers are more common among retirees exiting from defined contribution plans, those entitled to defined benefit pensions may also be in a position to rollover assets when receiving a lump-sum pay out. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \17\ Fiduciary Release, supra note 4 (``Financial institutions face an innate conflict of interest, in that a financial institution that provides a recommendation or advice concerning a rollover to a retirement investor may expect to earn transaction-based compensation such as commissions and/or receive an ongoing advisory fee that it likely would not receive if the assets were to remain in an ERISA- covered plan. Further, under the 1975 rule, if an investment advice provider makes a one-time recommendation that the worker move the entire balance of their retirement plan into an IRA and invest it in a particular annuity, then the advice provider has no fiduciary obligation under ERISA to honor the worker's best interest unless this recommendation is part of an `ongoing'' advice relationship. The resulting compensation represents a significant revenue source for investment advice providers.''). Conflicted advice in rollovers can significantly eat into retirement savings. According to a study from the Pew Charitable Trusts, ``in 2018 alone, investors rolled $516.7 billion from employer retirement plans into traditional IRAs. An analysis of fee differentials suggests that over a hypothetical retirement period of 25 years, those retail investors could see an aggregate reduction in savings of about $45.5 billion--just from that single year of rollovers.'' Failure to ensure best interest advice for rollovers is a glaring gap that can harm the long-term financial security of retirement savers. \18\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \18\ Pew Charitable Trusts, ``Small Differences in Mutual Fund Fees Can Cut Billions From Americans' Retirement Savings,'' June 30, 2022, https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/issue-briefs/ 2022/06/small-differences-in-mutual-fund-fees-can-cut-billions-from- americans-retirement-savings. Another important gap left by the current 5-part test that must be addressed is the lack of protections for plan sponsors. The requirement that a relationship with an investor be regular or ongoing for it to be subject to a fiduciary standard has resulted in this standard not applying to advice provided to small businesses. These plan sponsors are also not protected under Reg BI, because advice to them is considered ``plan-level'', which falls under ``institutional advice'' and is therefore exempt. The NAIC Model Rule also excludes from its suitability requirements the purchase of annuity-based retirement plans by small business owners. It is unclear why those small businesses managing retirement plans on behalf of their employees should not --------------------------------------------------------------------------- receive the same protections as individual investors. Some have argued that in its passage of SECURE 2.0, Congress intended to expand access to annuities, indicating that the industry should not be regulated further. This is flawed logic--the fact that greater access to annuities was provided in SECURE 2.0 does not indicate that Congress intended for consumers to receive substandard protections. In fact, it underscores the need for greater protections and ensuring these products and the people recommending investments in them are held to a higher best interests standards. Finally, some have argued that lower-and middle-income savers will lose access to financial advice, despite no hard evidence. Indeed, similar arguments were made before the SEC implemented its own best interest standard, and no access problems have arisen. Some have pointed to limited industry ``research'' provided by Deloitte. But Deloitte itself states: ``The findings presented are based on the analysis of information and data provided to Deloitte. Deloitte has analyzed, aggregated and summarized the information provided, but was not asked to and did not independently verify, validate or audit the information provided during the course of the engagement.'' \19\ Indeed, the methodology for this ``analysis'' is not provided, nor was the underlying data made available to independent parties so that the conclusions found could be analyzed and tested--in spite of repeated requests by the Department of Labor. \20\ In fact, the findings of this report are based on interviews with just 21 of hundreds of firms, with no information provided as to how these firms were chosen, whether they are representative of the market, or what questions were asked. \21\ In short, it lacks academic rigor and transparency. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \19\ Deloitte (commissioned by SIFMA), ``The DOL Fiduciary Rule: A study on how financial institutions have responded and the resulting impacts on retirement investors,'' August 19, 2017, https:// www.sifma.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/08/Deloitte-White-Paper-on-the- DOL-Fiduciary-Rule-August-2017.pdf. \20\ Consumer Federation of America, ``Comment Letter Re: RIN 1210-AB82, Request for Information Regarding the Fiduciary Rule and Prohibited Transaction Exemptions,'' October 24, 2017, https:// consumerfed.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/cfa-dol-fiduciary-response- to-industry-rule-opponents.pdf. \21\ Ibid. A more recent study from the National Association of Insurance and Financial Advisors (NAIFA) similarly lacks rigor or transparency. It does however, shed light on the degree to which the members selected for participation in the survey provide conflicted advice to their clients. In the survey, 23.58 percent of participants agreed and 43.47 percent strongly agreed that they would have to stop or reduce sales of fixed annuities or non-securities investment products if the rule were implemented. \22\ This underscores the importance of implementing this rule and ensuring that consumers have the protections they deserve. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \22\ NAIFA, ``Impact of the Proposed DOL Fiduciary-Only Rule on NAIFA Members,'' December 2023, https://2635471.fs1.hubspotusercontent- na1.net/hubfs/2635471/ NAIFA%20Members%20Respond%20to%20the%20Proposed%20US%20DOL%20Rule.pdf. Further, as noted, this proposed rule aligns with Reg BI, which was implemented in 2019. There has been no evidence that Reg BI has reduced lower-and middle-income workers' access to investment recommendations. When looking abroad to the United Kingdom, we see that the application of similar standards has actually increased access to financial advice, rather than decreased access. The UK's Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) found that `` approximately 8 percent (4.1m) of all UK adults have received financial advice, an increase from 6 percent (3.1m) in 2017.'' \23\ Rather than the new proposed rule having a negative effect on retirement savers, the rule will instead improve their investing outcomes. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \23\ FCA, ``FCA publishes evaluation of its work on the financial advice market,'' November 29, 2021, https://www.fca.org.uk/news/press- releases/fca-publishes-evaluation-financial-advice-market. Under existing requirements, it is the lower-and middle-income retirement savers who suffer the most from conflicted advice, as wealthier investors tend to work with advisers who are already fiduciaries and put their clients' best interests before their own. As one of today's witnesses, Kamila Elliott, put it when she testified before the Department of Labor on the proposed rule: ``The wealthy receive financial advice that is best for them. Why shouldn't those with moderate incomes be treated the same?'' \24\ There is no reason that lower-and middle-income retirement savers do not merit the same consumer protections as wealthier investors. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \24\ Kamila Elliott, ``CFP BOARD 2022 CHAIR KAMILA ELLIOTT, CFP TESTIFIES AT DOL HEARING ON RETIREMENT SECURITY RULE,'' December 18, 2023, https://www.cfp.net/news/2023/12/kamila-elliott-testimony. While there may be a transition period during which advisers work through the requirements of this proposal, currently, 1 in 3 financial advisors (97,000 advisors) in the United States are Certified Financial Planner (CFP) Board certified. As part of the CFP certification, these financial planners make a commitment to act as a fiduciary when providing financial advice and to put their clients' best interests first. Many financial professionals are already operating under a fiduciary standard and put their clients' best interests before their own and will not have to make operational changes as a result of this --------------------------------------------------------------------------- rule. Stronger consumer protections ultimately will result in better financial advice as those advisers who would rather put their own interests before their customers will either raise their standards or lose access to those clients. All retirement savers deserve to have their financial advisers make investment recommendations to them under a best interests standard--anything less is not serving retirement savers and will harm their ability to retire securely and with dignity. The Department of Labor Retirement Security Rule Should be Implemented Without Delay This is a common-sense rule--and most people are surprised to learn it isn't already a requirement for financial professionals. AARP polling shows that 9 in 10 adults over the age of 50 support the requirement that financial professionals act in their best interest. \25\ Retirement savers rely on financial professionals to make important investment decisions and need to be able to trust these advisers are acting in their best interest. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \25\ AARP Research, supra note 2. When people go to a financial advisor with questions about their life savings, they need to be able to trust they are getting good advice. The United States spends hundreds of billions on tax benefits to encourage retirement savings, and those dollars should not be wasted when families get conflicted advice from a professional. Where advice providers are not required to observe a best interest standard, retirement security is undermined, and retirees suffer the consequences. Monetary losses can be staggering, and retirement may be delayed or postponed. The quality-of-life post-retirement can be significantly reduced. We urge Members of Congress to support this proposal, oppose any efforts to defund it, and to ensure the Department of Labor implements this Rule swiftly. (D) Conclusion Thank you for considering AARP's perspective, and the perspective of millions of older Americans who have saved for retirement throughout their working lives, on ways to address the current retirement crisis. We must and can do better for current and future retirees to expand their access to retirement plans and protect their retirement savings. We look forward to working with Congress on constructive solutions to improve coverage and help Americans retire with financial security and dignity. ______  National United Committee To Protect Pensions, Summerfield, NC, February 25, 2024. Dear Members of the Senate Help Committee: I worked in the trucking industry for over forty years, with the last 23 years at ABF Freight. I worked long hours and missed many of my children's after-school activities and other family events. Although these hours were a significant burden on my family, the biggest draw was the promise of a pension, the preferred retirement system in the 70's and 80's. We all had our dream of working hard and long for 30 years or so and retiring with dignity in our golden years. The multi- employer pension system was and still is a great retirement system. You had the opportunity to work for different companies, and even if they went out of business, you had the chance not to lose your pension time, which is something you could never get back. The trucking industry was shaken to its core during deregulation. The domino effect of mergers and acquisitions was intense for many years, but the pension fund system worked for the workers. All of us were going through job changes and layoffs and hirings. The one thing we were all banking on was the Central States Pension Fund. Then, in 2008, the Great Recession happened, and it took only a few months for the Central States to lose 11 Billion dollars. They tried to make adjustments, but it didn't work. What was needed was exactly what the institutions and the banking industry were given--a rescue plan. The Pension Fund was slated to go bankrupt in 2025. When I received my letter from the Central States Pension Fund threatening a cut of 28 percent, we were devastated. It was losing everything I worked for and through no fault of my own. I followed all the rules and put money aside, and because of Wall Street's irresponsibility, it was gone. My Wife and I were sitting at the kitchen table, and survival would be tough no matter how much we looked at it. Fortunately, after forming a grassroots movement and many years of lobbying Congress, the Butch Lewis Act was passed by Congress and signed into law by President Joe Biden. Without this Act, things would have been unbearable. Our adult son with MS lives with us, and now we are also sharing responsibility for his son, our grandson. Without this rescue, our only option would have been to go on a welfare program or another government-subsidized program. It also allows us to give back to our community, church, and other family members that need help. We know other retirees who also raise grandchildren and are in the same situation. In addition, and very importantly, this Rescue gave us our dignity of work back. It was a much better way to fix the situation than the bankruptcy of thousands of companies and putting millions of retirees on government poverty programs. It is important to remember that our pensions were earned over a lifetime of hard work and dedication to our companies, communities, country, and families. Thank God for the Butch Lewis Act. Respectfully, Bernard Anderson, NUCPP Treasurer, Kim Anderson. ______ National United Committee To Protect Pensions, Summerfield, NC, February 25, 2024. Senate Help Committee: Thank you for allowing us to submit a letter to you. I am 69 years old, and my wife is 65 years old. We have a combined 42 years in the Central States Pension Fund. Our pension is the foundation upon which we built our retirement plan. I retired in December 2013, and Bobbie will retire on February 29, 2024. Our pension allows us to live our lives in our current lifestyle, which has been our goal. We can pay taxes, afford medical insurance, maintain our residence, donate to our church, and several other organizations we support. Retirement was a dream as I worked years of third shifts, 6 days a week with Tuesdays and Wednesdays off at my first job that included a pension. Not a week went by that I did not think of my upcoming retirement. I know our dream for retirement is not everyone's dream, but I can tell you personally what a retirement nightmare is without a pension. My parents are middle class, have no pension, and live on just two social security checks and a required minimum distribution from a modest 401K. We lost Pop 6 months ago to a stroke. He was in the hospital for 16 days, in rehab/long-term care for 60 days, unable to walk. Before he passed away, his caretakers told us Medicare would end in 30 more days, and current care would be $10,000 a month, self-pay. Pop would always ask who was paying for his care, and I told him it was Medicare and his supplemental insurance. He never knew it was only for one hundred days. He was 88 years old when he passed. My mom is 89 years old and diagnosed with dementia. Her long-term memory is good, but she cannot remember what she ate for supper. What cost for care is she facing? A pension would not have stopped what happened, but it would have given them enough money with their family's help to make it. I do not have numbers/statistics, but I think it would be shocking to know the percentage of pensions used to pay long-term medical care. What is the percentage of people over 65 forced into bankruptcy due to medical needs before they die? Pensions will not stop this but will give a person enough money to purchase long-term care insurance, which I believe is a wiser investment than burial insurance. It is safe to say that every pension supports the needs of at least three people. As my husband stated, having full pensions allows us both to retire while maintaining a lifestyle as if we both still worked. In today's world, we are all connected; pension moneys will enable us to be providers and contributors in society. Our money flows to family, to church, to serve God, to missions abroad and this country, to businesses, groceries, vehicle maintenance, utilities, maintaining a home, to insurance-medical, house, automotive and allows us to take trips/vacations. Pension money supports various layers of need, helping many people and us to continue providing for our upkeep. Working-class people's wages are insufficient to support essential family needs such as housing, medical care, education, and nourishment while also funding a retirement plan. This is the reason that earning a pension is so valuable. Pensions allow us to live with dignity, and we thank you for finding a way to ensure we receive our earned pension. Truly Blessed, James Hanner, NUCPP Trustee, Bobbie Hanner. ______ National United Committee To Protect Pensions, Summerfield, NC, February 26, 2024. Dear Distinguished Members of the Senate HELP Committee: Retirement is a dream goal for almost all people who work hard and strive to save toward it. Early in my life, I knew saving enough was almost impossible with most wages. As a result, I chose to seek employment with a company that offered a defined benefit plan. The contributions were paid into the plan by my company but were a part of my wages, so they were considered deferred compensation. I worked long hours for over 30 years while deferring large amounts of my income into my pension plan. As a result of the work, my body was breaking down, and my 3rd back surgery denied me the ability to return. I had spent a lifetime working and planning for the years when I couldn't work anymore. That was in November 2014. I did have concerns about how we would survive financially. My family had what they needed, but many sacrifices were made. Our saving grace was my earned pension. My age did not allow me to start collecting, but I knew that in 5 years, my planning would pay off. Imagine the anguish and concern that my wife and I had in 2015 when I received a notification stating that my benefits would be reduced by 67 percent! This was almost crushing. What would we do? Why had we sacrificed for more than 30 years? Thankfully, Congress did pass the BLA and restored the total value of my pension. We now live comfortably and give back to our community through donations and time. We can continue to help our family and church financially as well. Many have criticized the BLA as a taxpayer-funded giveaway, but I believe it is the exact opposite. We are and have always been taxpayers. Because of my restored pension, we can support local and national businesses by spending our money to drive the economy. We take care of 100 percent of our healthcare and hopefully have all bases covered for long-term care or any other unknown health crises that may come our way. Many people live their lives as if tomorrow may never come. They may or may not work but will spend everything they have as it comes. All these people will land on the shoulders of the U.S. taxpayers in multiple ways, like food, housing, energy, healthcare, or any of the many other programs my tax dollars have supported and still support. When programs like a defined pension, social security, and Medicare are threatened, the taxpayers who sacrifice today and plan for tomorrow based on these promises begin questioning themselves. Maybe they, too, should live every day as if it's the last. Save nothing and work as little as possible because all the sacrifices will never be rewarded. Without truly believing your plan will come to fruition, there is no reason to try. If that happens, all those people who now are taxpayers will instead become burdens on the system. Thank God for the good people who support and defend the middle- class workers. Our Country was built and thrives off of their backs. Respectfully, Davey Grubbs, NUCPP Vice President. ______ National United Committee To Protect Pensions, Summerfield, NC, February 27, 2024. I retired from Teamsters Local 200 in Milwaukee, WI, after thirty years of service in the freight industry. In March 2015, I received a letter about a possible 55 percent reduction to my monthly retirement benefit from the Central States Pension Fund. I was devastated. Then, a few months later, my wife and I were informed she was ill with terminal cancer. That additional stress of not knowing how we would manage our monthly and medical expenses became a huge burden. My life changed that day. My mind started wondering if I would be forced out of my home. Would we become a burden on our children or become dependent on government assistance? I knew I had to get involved after talking with others at a local retiree meeting. My wife and I discussed it, and although we knew tough times were coming with her health issues, she asked me to promise to fight for the pension until it was saved. I joined the NUCPP and spent the next 7 years lobbying Congress and traveling throughout the United States. With the government oversight of protecting the multiemployer pension funds that was in place, it was Congress's fiduciary responsibility to solve this crisis. On Day 49 of President Joe Biden taking office, he signed the American Rescue Plan into law, which included the Butch Lewis Act to help struggling pension funds that impacted over 10.1 million Americans. On December 8, 2022, I had the honor of introducing President Biden as he announced that the Central States Pension Fund would receive almost $37 billion dollars in special financial assistance from the PBGC. My health concerns which developed from the stress of my wife's illness and traveling week after week to DC for 7 years, as well as the worry of becoming a burden to my family if I would lose my pension, have since improved since the signing of the Butch Lewis Act. I have time to care for my health, spend time with my grandchildren, support local businesses, and donate to charities that desperately need help. Notably, the Butch Lewis Act has given me back my dignity and allowed me to collect what I earned over a lifetime of hard work. A Promise is a Promise is a Promise. Respectfully, Kenneth Stribling, NUCPP President-Milwaukee. ______ National United Committee To Protect Pensions, Summerfield, NC, February 27, 2024. Dear Members of the Senate Help Committee: Thank you for taking the time to review personal statements from several NUCPP Executive Board of Directors members. As you can tell, the emotional impact on these Teamster retirees was intense and life- altering. If I may, I would also like to call attention to a group of people directly impacted, but often the silent minority. As Secretary and Director of Communication of the NUCPP, I receive many phone calls and emails from retirees that were directly impacted by the threatened pension reductions and who are now able to live their lives because of the Butch Lewis Act. Many of these calls and emails are from spouses of the pension retiree. You often hear the stories of the long-distance truck driver who spent days away from home. However, you don't often hear from the spouses who, in many cases, could not earn an income outside of the home because they were the ones raising the family, taking the children to doctor appointments, after-school activities, and other functions that are necessary as a family. It was a life lesson for the children that mom and dad were sacrificing a quality family life in return for his hard work paying off when it was finally time for retirement. Imagine the gut punch when the letter from Central States Pension Fund came, notifying them of a cut in the pension of anywhere from 25 percent-75 percent. And to add to that, the spouse who was staying home, raising the family primarily by herself, would now have her survival benefit if the husband passed away (which varies, but could already be only half of his pension amount) reduced by that 25 percent- 75 percent! What was she to do, become a burden to her family? How can that be explained when that husband and wife were only playing by the rules that were in place? By the passing of The Butch Lewis Act, all of the sacrifices of these husbands, wives, and families were not for naught. They could live their retirement as they had planned for. It is also worth noting how many of these retirees now support children and raise grandchildren. The BLA keeps many of these family members off government programs and positively influences the importance of working hard. The future of our Country relies on people believing that if you work hard and play by the rules, you will receive what you were promised. The Butch Lewis Act reinforced that principle, and we are thankful for all of those who supported us during our long pension fight. Thank you for your attention. Dana M. Vargo, NUCPP Director of Communications-Massillon, OH. ______   Insured Retirement Institute, Washington DC, February 28, 2024. Hon. Bernie Sanders, Chairman, Hon. Bill Cassidy, Ranking Member, U.S. Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions, 428 Dirksen Senate Office Building, Washington, DC. Dear Chairman Sanders and Ranking Member Cassidy: The Insured Retirement Institute (IRI) \1\ is pleased to submit this letter and requests that it be entered into the record for the hearing to be held on Wednesday, February 28, 2024, by the U.S. Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions titled ``Taking a Serious Look at the Retirement Crisis in America: What Can We Do to Expand Defined Benefit Pension Plans for Workers?'' IRI commends you for your leadership in conducting this hearing that continues the Committee's examination of policy solutions to help America's workers and retirees address the anxiety they have about saving for their retirement and having protected, guaranteed income to sustain them throughout their retirement years. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \1\ The Insured Retirement Institute (IRI) is the leading association for the entire supply chain of insured retirement strategies, including life insurers, asset managers, broker-dealers, banks, marketing organizations, law firms, and solution providers. IRI members account for 90 percent of annuity assets in the U.S., including the foremost distributors of protected lifetime income solutions, and are represented by financial professionals serving millions of Americans. IRI champions retirement security for all through leadership in advocacy, awareness, research, and the advancement of digital solutions within a collaborative industry community. Our members support and advocate for common sense, bipartisan policies to help America's workers and retirees achieve their retirement goals by expanding access to professional financial guidance and lifetime income products within an appropriate and effective consumer protection framework. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- America's Growing Retirement Anxiety and Savings Crisis According to a survey of voters aged 25-plus conducted for AARP, more than six in 10 (63 percent) are anxious about having enough money to live comfortably throughout their retirement years, and only three in 10 (29 percent) of voters ages 25-44 believe that they will be able to save enough money for retirement. Among voters aged 45-plus who are not yet retired, eight in 10 (81 percent) wish they had more money saved for their retirement years. The AARP survey also showed that virtually all voters (99.7 percent) say that it is important for people to be able to save money for retirement while they are working, but only two in three (65 percent) employed voters say that they are currently participating in a workplace retirement savings plan offered by their employer. \2\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \2\ ``Saving For Retirement at Work: Views of Voters Ages 25+'', AARP, October 2021. Two other studies provide further insights into the depth of this anxiety. A study from Allianz Life Insurance Company of North America found that 66 percent of America's workers worry they will run out of money during retirement. \3\ A National Institute of Retirement Security survey found that more than two-thirds--67 percent--say the Nation faces a retirement crisis, and more than half--56 percent--are concerned that they will not achieve a financially secure retirement. \4\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \3\ ``2023 Q2 Quarterly Market Perceptions Study'', Allianz Life Insurance Company of North America, July 2023. \4\ ``Retirement Insecurity 2021--American Views of Retirement'', National Institute of Retirement Security, February 2021. The anxiety over attaining retirement security is more prevalent among people of color. Fifty-six percent of Black and Latino workers and retirees say they are worried about their financial future. \5\ That is 10 percent more than their White counterparts. \6\ Additionally, according to a December 2021 study, more than half of Black and Latino households have no retirement savings. \7\ Of those with savings, the median savings for households with savers aged 25 to 61 is $29,200 for Black households and $23,000 for Latinos. By comparison, more than two-thirds of White households have savings and a median of $79,000 set aside for their retirement years. \8\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \5\ ``2020 Financial Wellness Census.'' Prudential. March 2021. \6\ Ibid. \7\ ``Retirement Savings by Race.'' Investopedia. December 2021. \8\ Ibid. This research confirms what IRI's members hear from the millions of people they work with each day to plan and save for their retirement years: workers and retirees are shouldering the responsibility of accumulating savings to produce income to sustain them during their --------------------------------------------------------------------------- retirement years. Factor #1: Lack of Access to Workplace Retirement Savings Plans One factor that significantly contributes to this anxiety is a lack of access to workplace retirement savings plans. According to AARP research, almost half of private sector employees--57 million Americans--do not have the option to save for retirement at work. Most workers who lack access to an employer-sponsored retirement plan are employed by small businesses, with about three-fourths of those workers at companies with fewer than 10 employees and about two-thirds of those workers at companies with 10 to 24 employees. In addition, there are disparities by race and ethnicity among those workers, with nearly 64 percent of Latino workers, 53 percent of Black workers, and 45 percent of Asian American workers lacking access to an employer-provided retirement plan. \9\ Additionally, Transamerica's research, ``Navigating the Pandemic: A Survey of U.S. Employers,'' found that 48 percent of employers do not offer a 401(k) or similar retirement plan, and 63 percent of those employers said they are not too likely or not likely at all to start a plan within the next 2 years. \10\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \9\ ``Payroll Deduction Retirement Programs Build Economic Security,'' AARP Public Policy Institute, July 11, 2022 \10\ ``Navigating the Pandemic: A Survey of U.S. Employers,'' Transamerica Institute, June 2021. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- Factor #2: Lack of Lifetime Income Distribution Options in Retirement Plans to Provide Sustainable Lifetime Income Another factor contributing to workers' and retirees' anxiety is the lack of access to lifetime income distribution options in retirement plans that would provide much-needed protection against outliving one's savings. According to recent research conducted by the Life Insurance Marketing and Research Association (LIMRA), an estimated nine in ten defined contribution plans have no in-plan distribution option for generating lifetime-guaranteed income for retiring employees. The survey found that of private-sector plan sponsors with at least 10 full-time employees, 49 percent of those that do not offer an in-plan annuity in their defined contribution plan said that they have considered adding one at some point but have not yet done so. \11\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \11\ ``Are In-Plan Annuities at a Tipping Point?'', Life Insurance Marketing and Research Association (LIMRA), November 2023. According to research conducted by Cerulli Associates of defined contribution recordkeepers, only 23 percent offered participants a distribution option of one-time lump sums converted to protected, guaranteed lifetime income paid out in monthly or quarterly payments. Conversely, only 8 percent of defined contribution plan recordkeepers reported that 16 percent or more of their defined contribution plan clients have adopted a guaranteed in-plan retirement income option. Less than half of surveyed recordkeepers let their participants take ad-hoc withdrawals as needed. \12\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \12\ ``The Cerulli Edge--Retirement Edition,'' Cerulli Associates, 2016. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- The Decline of Defined Benefit Plans While defined benefit plans offer features that can address these two factors causing workers and retirees anxiety about their future retirement security, another trend is also at play. During the past several decades, there has been a substantial decline in employer- sponsored defined benefit plans and the percentage of assets contained in those plans. \13\ The decline of defined benefit plans is attributed primarily to the elimination of plans with 100 or fewer participants, most of which were eliminated because of the complexity and cost required to administer an employer-sponsored defined benefit pension plan. \14\ During that same time, there has been a substantial increase in employee-funded defined contribution plans and the percentage of assets contained in those plans, making it an unrealistic aim to now seek to expand the availability of defined benefit plans. \15\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \13\ ``IRI Fact Book 2023'', Chapter 1, Page 10. In 1985, there were over 114,000 private pension plans insured by the Pensions Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC), and today, that number is about 25,000, covering 33 million people. \14\ Ibid, Chapter 13, Page 126. \15\ Ibid, Chapter 1, Page 11. The percentage of asset allocated to individual plans (including annuities, individual retirement accounts, and employer-sponsored contribution plans such as 401(k), 403(b) and 457 plans) versus private pensions has increased steadily, reaching 88 percent in 2022. Chapter 12, Page 121. Assets in defined contribution plans were $9.3 trillion, or 27 percent of total assets in 2022, compared to 26 percent in 2000. In contrast, assets held in employer-sponsored defined benefit plans decreased from 17 percent to only 9 percent of total retirement plan assets between 2000 and 2020. At the end of 2022, assets held in individual retirement accounts and Keoghs (tax-deferred retirement savings plans for self-employed individuals or small business owners) accounted for the largest segment of the retirement plan market with $12.0 trillion, or 35 percent of total assets, as compared to 23 percent in 2000. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- Defined Contribution Plans Offer the Guaranteed Income Features of Defined Benefit Plans The primary goal of a retirement plan is not to obtain tax deferral but rather to provide retirement income that will last for the life of the retiree. Defined benefit plans distribute their benefits through life annuities. In a life annuity, employees receive equal periodic benefit payments (monthly, quarterly, etc.) for the rest of their lives. If married, and the employee has chosen the joint and survivor option, upon his or her death, the surviving spouse can continue to receive distributions of at least 50 percent of the employee's periodic payment amount. Some defined benefit plans may also allow employees to receive their entire benefit in one lump sum at retirement. \16\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \16\ Ibid, Chapter 13, Page 126. Today, due to the work that Congress undertook during the 116th and 117th Sessions, two of the most sweeping and comprehensive new laws were enacted aimed at bolstering employer-sponsored defined contribution plans to strengthen retirement security for millions more of our Nation's workers and retirees. The SECURE Act of 2019 \17\ and the SECURE 2.0 Act of 2022 \18\ included measures that will expand opportunities to save for retirement during an individual's working years and facilitate the availability and use of protected, guaranteed lifetime income distribution options for plan participants. These bills were developed and strongly supported by a broad bipartisan coalition of Members of Congress--including many Members of the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions Committee. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \17\ Public Law 116-94. \18\ Public Law 117-328. Specifically, these new laws recognized that workers who are given the option to choose to save in an employer-provided defined contribution plan should also be afforded a chance to secure protected lifetime income through a benefit that mimics a more traditional pension. By offering a lifetime income solution, like an annuity, employees will be given a choice to invest a percentage of ongoing contributions in an in-plan investment option that will build up a stream of guaranteed income for life that is not subject to the same market volatility of a typical equity or bond investment option in a 401(k) plan. These in-plan guaranteed income options typically provide downside income protection through insurance guarantees, upside income potential through participation in financial markets, and guaranteed income for life. \19\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \19\ ``IRI Fact Book 2023'', Chapter 12, Page 123. Employers offering plan participants a chance to choose a lifetime income distribution option (rather than just providing for a lump-sum distribution of retirement savings) will help workers who may have difficulties allocating their savings across their retirement years in a way that is similar to how a participant in a defined benefit plan receives distributions during their retirement years. This is especially true for retirees who live longer than anticipated. Recent IRI research showed that workers have a high level of interest in having protected lifetime income solutions, such as annuities, included in workplace defined contribution retirement plans. The survey revealed that seven in 10 workers of the youngest age cohort (age 40-45) said they are very or somewhat likely to allocate a portion of their plan to annuities, 87 percent believe it is important that the income from savings is protected for life, and 26 percent indicated that lifetime income is the most important retirement investment trait. \20\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \20\ ``Retirement Readiness Among Older Workers 2021'', Insured Retirement Institute, September 2021. It is clear from the research conducted by IRI and others that an overwhelming majority of employees want to have retirement plan products that offer protected income for life among their options. Additionally, the research demonstrates that the insured retirement industry is ready to provide in-plan lifetime income solutions via products that are already readily available. In other words, the demand is strong, and the industry is poised to meet that demand. \21\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \21\ ``BlackRock Is Adding Annuities to 401(k)'s'', Wall Street Journal, October 6, 2021. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- Proposed Measures to Bolster Retirement Security for More of America's Workers and Retirees While much was accomplished through the SECURE Act and the SECURE 2.0 Act, more can be done to further bolster retirement security. IRI respectfully submits for your consideration the public policy proposals outlined below, which if enacted into law will expand opportunities for savings, facilitate the greater use of protected, guaranteed lifetime income solutions, and maintain and augment the current tax treatment of retirement savings to encourage savings. IRI also submits for your consideration a recommendation that the Committee urges the withdrawal of the Department of Labor's (DOL) 2023 Retirement Security Rule package as it runs counter to Congress's intent and the measures included in the SECURE Act and the SECURE 2.0 Act to strengthen and enhance retirement security for America's workers and retirees. Public Policy Proposal #1: Expand Opportunities to Save for Retirement Require Employers to Offer Retirement Plans to Employees To provide more workers with opportunities to access a workplace retirement plan and increase their retirement savings, Congress should enact legislation such as the Automatic IRA Act of 2024 (H.R. 7293- 118th Congress), which would generally require all but the smallest of employers to maintain an automatic retirement savings plan, into which employees would be automatically enrolled with the ability to opt-out. A recent study of the impact of such a new law on workers' retirement security found that over the next 10 years, $7 trillion in additional retirement savings would be generated, and 62 million new retirement savers would be created. \22\ The legislation will also help address the anxiety felt by many of America's workers and retirees about outliving their retirement savings by requiring that participants with account balances of $200,000 or more be given the choice to receive up to 50 percent of their vested balance in the form of protected, guaranteed lifetime income products. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \22\ Letter of Support Retirement Subtitle ``Build Back Better Act, Page 2, Footnote #s 3-5, ARA, September 2021. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- Automatically Re-Enroll Employees Three Years After Opting Out The SECURE 2.0 Act of 2022 mandated that all new 401(k) and 403(b) plans automatically enroll participants into the respective plans while preserving participants' choice to opt out of coverage. This change will significantly expand participation in workplace retirement savings plans as studies have shown participation rates increase to more than 90 percent under these circumstances. \23\ An increase in the use of automatic enrollment features has increased retirement plan participation particularly among Black, Latino, and lower-wage employees. \24\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \23\ ``How Americans Save,'' Vanguard, 2023. \24\ ``Bringing greater financial equity to the workplace to support everyone's opportunity for a better financial future,'' Voya, April 2023. To further expand the use of automatic enrollment in employer- sponsored defined contribution plans, Congress should enact legislation such as the Auto Re-Enroll Act of 2023 (S. 2517/H.R. 4924--118th Congress). The bill would amend ERISA and the Internal Revenue Code to allow plan sponsors to automatically re-enroll non-participants at least every 3 years. This option will prompt workers who have decided to opt out to periodically reevaluate whether to participate in the --------------------------------------------------------------------------- plan as their careers progress and financial situations change. Further, Congress should enact legislation such as S. 2512-118th Congress to provide a $500 credit for up to 3 years to any small employers (100 or fewer employees) that adopts an automatic re- enrollment feature in a retirement plan that enrolls employees into elective deferral contributions. This new tax credit would not only encourage employers to offer this feature in their workplace plans, but it would also benefit their workers by providing them an opportunity every 3 years to reevaluate their financial decisions. Decrease the Age for Participation in Workplace Retirement Plans to 18 Years of Age Congress should enact legislation such as the Helping Young Americans Save for Retirement Act (S. 3305-118th Congress). The bill would enable more young workers to access employer-sponsored retirement savings plans by reducing the age of participation in an ERISA-covered defined contribution plan to 18. Lowering the participation age to 18 will expand opportunities for younger workers to save for retirement by providing them with an additional 3 years to begin saving and take advantage of the growth offered by compounding interest. Public Policy Proposal #2: Facilitate Greater Use of Protected, Guaranteed Lifetime Income Solutions Expand the Use of Lifetime Income Products as Default Investment Options Qualified default investment alternatives (QDIAs), created by the Pension Protection Act of 2006, \25\ have proven to be an essential step forward in enhancing retirement security for America's workers. Unfortunately, DOL regulations \26\ inhibit the use of certain investment options that do not meet specific liquidity requirements. The regulations essentially mandate that any funds in a QDIA must be available for the participant to transfer or withdraw ``not less frequently than once within any 3-month period.'' However, the liquidity requirement in the current rules effectively prohibits the use of protected, guaranteed lifetime income solutions that have delayed liquidity features despite the fact that these features allow them to offer higher returns. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \25\ Public Law 109-280. \26\ Section 404(c)(5) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 8 U.S.C. 1104(c)(5)). Accordingly, Congress should enact legislation such as the Lifetime Income for Employees Act (H.R. 3942-118th Congress). The bill would allow plan sponsors to utilize annuities that provide a guaranteed return on investment and have a delayed liquidity feature as a default investment vehicle for a portion of contributions made by a retirement saver who has not made investment selections. Encourage the Offering of Protected, Guaranteed Lifetime Income Products as Default Distribution Options To address workers' and retirees' anxiety and insecurity about outliving their retirement savings, Congress should enact legislation providing that employers who offer protected, guaranteed lifetime income solutions as a default distribution option for participants in their defined contribution plans will have satisfied their fiduciary duties under ERISA so long as participants are notified of the default annuitization option and have the right to opt-out at the time of distribution. Encouraging employers to offer protected, guaranteed lifetime income distribution options as a default in defined contribution plans will help further protect individuals from longevity risk and enhance and strengthen their retirement security. Additionally, Congress should enact legislation that would establish qualified payout options (Q-PON) that require employers who have at least 10 employees and have provided a plan for at least 3 years to offer a combination of income and payout solutions that participants can select from at retirement. Some options that could be made available as a Q-PON include protected, guaranteed lifetime income solutions, systemic withdrawal options, managed payout options, and lump sum withdrawals. Q-PONs would apply to participants or beneficiaries of 401(k), profit-sharing 401(a), 403(b), or ``Starter'' 401(k) plans. Authorize the Use of Indexed and Variable Annuities in QLACs Qualifying longevity annuity contracts (QLACs) are a valuable tool for retirement income planning as they address the risk many retirement savers and retirees face of outliving their accumulated retirement savings. The SECURE 2.0 Act of 2022 directed the Treasury Department to make changes to the regulations governing QLACs to allow retirement savers to convert more of their savings into protected, guaranteed lifetime income that will help meet their longevity protection needs. Additionally, the SECURE 2.0 Act established a 90-day ``free look'' period to give investors time to ensure that they have selected a product that fits their needs while also clarifying the applicable joint and survivor benefits in the event of a divorce. While these changes will allow workers and retirees to keep more of their savings in tax-deferred accounts longer and access protected, guaranteed monthly income throughout their lifetime, Congress should enact legislation such as Section 201(5) of the Retirement Security and Savings Act of 2021 (S. 1770-117th Congress) that would make a diverse slate of indexed and variable annuity contracts with guaranteed benefits eligible to be treated as QLACs. Providing retirement savers with access to a broader array of products that can meet their financial needs and circumstances will further address their anxiety about outliving their retirement savings. Public Policy Proposal #3: Maintain and Augment Tax Treatment of Retirement Savings Preserve Tax-Deferred Treatment for Retirement Savings Tax deferral for retirement savings plays a vital role in spurring America's economic growth and serves as a strong incentive for workers to accumulate retirement savings. Research conducted by IRI shows workers will save less if tax deferral is reduced or eliminated. \27\ Congress should continue to promote retirement savings by maintaining the tax deferral as a necessary tool that helps America's workers plan for and achieve a secure and dignified retirement. \27\ ``Boomer Expectations for Retirement 2018'', Insured Retirement Institute, April 2018. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- Protect the Current Structure and Variety of Workplace Retirement Plans Several types of employment-based defined contribution retirement plans are designed to meet employers' and workers' needs in various employment sectors, including the private, governmental, church, educational, and non-profit sectors. The most prominent types are 401(k), 403(b), and 457(b) plans. Proposals to consolidate these different structures into a single type of plan fail to recognize the essential distinctions between these different employment sectors. Congress should maintain and protect the diverse array of retirement plan structures rather than attempting to devise a single framework that would eliminate the unique features of the different plan types created to suit the workers who use them. Provide Favorable Tax Treatment for Guaranteed Lifetime Income Distributions and withdrawals from protected, guaranteed lifetime income products--like annuities--are currently taxed as ordinary income. However, these products provide significant social and economic benefits. By helping older Americans avoid outliving their assets, lifetime income from annuities can reduce pressure on Social Security and other social safety nets. Congress should create tax incentives-- such as a lower tax rate, an exclusion of a portion of lifetime annuity income from taxation, or an increased catch-up contribution--to encourage greater use of guaranteed lifetime income products. Public Policy Proposal #4: Urge Withdrawal of DOL's 2023 Fiduciary Proposal The common-sense legislative solutions described above would enhance access to savings and services to build short-and long-term financial security for more of America's workers and retirees. However, a recent rule proposal from DOL threatens to undermine the meaningful steps that Congress has taken to help workers and retirees prepare for and achieve a secure and dignified retirement. On October 31, 2023, the President publicly announced a proposed DOL rule titled ``Retirement Security Rule: Definition of an Investment Advice Fiduciary.'' \28\ The ``one-size-fits-all'' approach taken by the DOL in this proposal will expand the definition of who is an ERISA fiduciary to virtually all financial professionals providing retirement investment guidance. As a result, millions of our Nation's workers and retirees--particularly lower-and middle-income retirement savers--will be harmed. The proposed rule will make it harder, more expensive, and in many cases impossible for individuals to access professional financial guidance and lifetime income solutions. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \28\ ``Proposed Retirement Security Rule: Definition of an Investment Advice Fiduciary; Proposed Amendment to Prohibited Transaction Exemption 2020-02; Proposed Amendment to Prohibited Transaction Exemption 84-24; and Proposed Amendment to Prohibited Transaction Exemptions 75-1, 77-4, 80-83, 83-1, and 86-128, United States Department of Labor, Employee Benefits Security Administration, November 3, 2023. The 2023 rule proposal is functionally equivalent to a rule adopted by the DOL in 2016. \29\ When the 2016 rule went into effect, 10.2 million retirement savers lost access to essential financial advice through their brokerage accounts. \30\ The Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals vacated the 2016 rule, which helped to prevent more harm to retirement savers at that time. \31\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \29\ ``Definition of the Term ``Fiduciary''; Conflict of Interest Rule-Retirement Investment Advice'', U.S. Department of Labor, Employee Benefits Security Administration, April 8, 2016. \30\ ``The DOL Fiduciary Rule: A study on how financial institutions have responded and the resulting impacts on retirement investors.'' Deloitte. August 2017. \31\ Chamber of Commerce of The United States of America; Financial Services Institute, Incorporated; Financial Services Roundtable; Greater Irving-Las Colinas Chamber of Commerce; Humble Area Chamber of Commerce, Doing Business as Lake Houston Chamber of Commerce; Insured Retirement Institute; Lubbock Chamber of Commerce; Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association; Texas Association of Business v. United States Department of Labor; R. Alexander Acosta, Secretary, U.S. Department of Labor, United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, March 15, 2018. In 2021, Quantria Strategies conducted a study to determine the economic impact of the DOL's continued pursuit of a vastly overbroad re-definition of ``investment advice'' that would expand the reach of ERISA fiduciary status to nearly all financial professionals who work with retirement savers. Among the study's findings was the startling revelation that adoption of a proposal substantially similar to the 2016 rule would result in a disproportionate reduction in the retirement savings of our Nation's Black and Hispanic populations-- resulting in a 20 percent increase in the racial wealth gap over a 10- year period. \32\ The DOL has not addressed this evidence that the proposal will harm people of color, nor does it present any evidence to the contrary or, for that matter, any evidence that changes to the existing Federal and state regulatory framework governing the conduct of financial professionals are even necessary at this time. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \32\ ``Analysis of the Effects of the 2016 Department of Labor Fiduciary Regulation on Retirement Savings and Estimates of the Effects of Reinstatement.'' Quantria Strategies. November 2021. In recent years, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and state insurance regulators have established robust best interest standards that protect retirement savers without the unnecessary and problematic restraints inherent in ERISA fiduciary status. Nearly all firms and financial professionals are now held to a best interest standard by regulators with the expertise needed to craft rules that --------------------------------------------------------------------------- make sense for the industries to which they apply. Specifically, the SEC adopted Regulation Best Interest, which requires firms and financial professionals to act in their clients' best interest when providing advice or recommendations regarding securities. \33\ The National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) adopted amendments to its model regulation on annuity sales practices to require that firms and financial professionals act in their clients' best interest when providing advice or recommendations regarding annuities. \34\ To date, 44 states have adopted the NAIC best interest model regulation, and the remaining states are expected to do so by the end of 2024. Moreover, the DOL established its own best interest standard in 2020 as a requirement under Prohibited Transaction Exemption 2020-02. \35\ Collectively, these rules establish a robust Federal and state framework that imposes tough but fair and workable responsibilities on the industry and provide Federal and state regulators with the tools they need to effectively protect retirement savers and appropriately address the conduct of bad actors. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \33\ U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, Regulation Best Interest: The Broker-Dealer Standard of Conduct, adopted June 5, 2019. \34\ National Association of Insurance Commissioners, Suitability in Annuity Transaction Model Regulation, adopted February 2020. \35\ U.S. Department of Labor, Employee Benefits Security Administration, Prohibited Transaction Exemption 2020-02, Improving Investment Advice for Workers & Retirees, adopted February 16, 2021. In 2015, 93 Democratic Members of Congress, 54 of whom still serve in the House and three of whom now serve in the Senate, sent a letter expressing similar concerns to the DOL in response to the proposal that ultimately became the 2016 rule. \36\ Specifically, the letter urged the DOL to ensure that its rule ``does not limit consumer choice and access to advice, have a disproportionate impact on lower-and middle- income communities, raise the costs of saving for retirement  or disadvantage lifetime income options.'' The concerns raised in the House Democrats' letter were not addressed in the final 2016 rule, nor are they addressed in the 2023 rule proposal. Leaving these concerns unaddressed is to the detriment of all individuals seeking to participate in the financial system and secure their financial futures. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \36\ Letter to U.S. Department of Labor Secretary Tom Perez from 93 Democrat Members of the U.S. House of Representatives, September 24, 2015. Adopting the 2023 proposal would represent a significant step backward in pursuing enhancements that make the private-sector retirement system more inclusive and effective. IRI has called for withdrawal of the proposal in testimony during the DOL's public hearing on December 12, 2023, \37\ written comments submitted to the DOL on January 2, 2024, \38\ and in testimony before the House Committee on Financial Services Subcommittee on Capital Markets on January 10, 2024 \39\ and the House Committee on Education and the Workforce Subcommittee on Health, Employment, Labor and Pensions on February 15, 2024. \40\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \37\ U.S. Department of Labor, Employee Benefits Security Administration, Retirement Security Rule: Definition of an Investment Advice Fiduciary and Related Exemptions Public Hearing, December 12, 2023. \38\ Comment Letter Submitted By the Insured Retirement Institute to United States Department of Labor Employee Benefits Security Administration ``2023 Retirement Security Rule Package,'' January 2, 2024. \39\ U.S. House Committee on Financial Services Subcommittee on Capital Markets Hearing, ``Examining the DOL Fiduciary Rule: Implications for Retirement Savings and Access'', January 10, 2024. \40\ U.S. House Committee on Education and the Workforce Subcommittee on Health, Employment, Labor, and Pensions Hearing, ``Protecting American Savers and Retirees from DOL's Regulatory Overreach'', February 15, 2024. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- Concluding Thoughts IRI thanks you for your leadership in pursuing solutions to help more of America's workers and retirees achieve a financially secure retirement. IRI also welcomes the opportunity to work with your offices to advance common-sense solutions that will expand opportunities for workers to save through workplace retirement savings plans and facilitate the use of lifetime income solutions to provide income to sustain retirees throughout their retirement years. If you have any questions, please do not hesitate to contact Wayne Chopus, President and CEO, Paul Richman, Chief Government and Political Affairs Officer, or John Jennings, Director Government and Political Affairs. Sincerely, Wayne Chopus, President and CEO, Paul Richman, Chief Government & Political Affairs Officer. ______ American Retirement Association Thank you, Chair Sanders, Ranking Member Cassidy, and Members of the Committee for the opportunity to submit a statement for the record on behalf of the American Retirement Association (ARA) in connection with the Hearing entitled ``Taking a Serious Look at the Retirement Crisis in America: What Can We Do to Expand Defined Benefit Pension Plans for Workers?'' The ARA is the coordinating entity for its five underlying affiliate organizations representing the full spectrum of America's private retirement system--the American Society of Enrolled Actuaries (ASEA), the American Society of Pension Professionals and Actuaries (ASPPA), the National Association of Plan Advisors (NAPA), the National Tax-Deferred Savings Association (NTSA), and the Plan Sponsor Council of America (PSCA). Combined the ARA represents over 35,000 retirement plan professionals nationwide. The ARA's members and their affiliated organizations support 95 percent of all the defined contribution plans, such as 401(k) plans, in the United States. The ARA and its underlying affiliate organizations are diverse in the roles they play, but united in their dedication to the success of America's private retirement system. The ARA's mission is to help working Americans strengthen their retirement security by facilitating well-designed workplace-based retirement savings plans. We do this by educating and informing retirement benefit professionals, and by advocating for policies that give every working American the opportunity to secure a comfortable retirement. Workplace retirement savings plans have proven that they work for those that have access to them. These plans provide long term economic growth and build financial security for the middle class. This includes both defined contributions plans, like 401(k) plans, as well as defined benefit plans, such as a standard pension plan. We appreciate you holding this hearing and look forward to a productive conversation on policies that Congress could implement to expand access and improve the employer-based system, not on ways to eliminate it or create a Federal system. Defined Contribution Plans Work for Those With Access For most Americans, the key to a successful retirement is having access to a workplace-based retirement savings plan. Recent data shows that nearly 60 percent of Americans--roughly 74.5 million--had access to a workplace-based retirement plan in 2020. At the end of the first quarter in 2021, defined contribution retirement plans (the most common being the 401(k) held $9.9 trillion in assets. \1\ Household retirement savings--including assets accumulated through those retirement plans plus all other types of retirement plans--represents 59 percent of the non-bank financial capital provided to the equity and bond markets. \2\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \1\ Investment Company Institute, Quarterly Retirement Market Data, June 16, 2021, available at https://www.ici.org/statistical- report/ret-21-q1. \2\ Oxford Economics, Another Penny Saved: The Economic Benefits of Higher U.S. Household Savings, June 2014, available at: http:// www.oxfordeconomics.com/anotherpennysaved. The middle class is the primary beneficiary of these plans. Nearly two-thirds (64 percent) of active participants in 401(k) plans have an adjusted gross income of less than $100,000 per year. \3\ One-third (33 percent) of participants have an income less than $50,000. \4\ The critical factor that determines whether these moderate-income workers save for their retirement is whether they have access to a retirement savings plan at work. Data shows that more than 70 percent of workers earning between $30,000 and $50,000 will save in a plan if they have access to a workplace-based plan, but fewer than 7 percent of these workers will save on their own through an IRA. \5\ Put differently, workers are 12 times more likely to save for their retirement if they have access to some type of payroll deduction retirement savings program offered by their employer. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \3\ Judy Xanthopoulos, Ph.D. of Quantria Strategies, analysis of Internal Revenue Service, Statistics of Income, Individual Income Tax, and IRA Studies, 2017 Tax Year. \4\ Ibid. \5\ IRS tabulations and Vanguard, How America Saves, 2018. Congress's continued support of expanding retirement plan coverage and simplifying retirement plan rules will increase retirement savings and build even further on the success of the workplace-based retirement plan system. SECURE 2.0: Working to Close the Coverage Gap Congress has taken strong bi-partisan action to close the retirement plan coverage gap by passing SECURE 2.0 a little over a year ago. This landmark piece of retirement legislation contains a variety of provisions specifically designed to make it easier and less expensive for small employers to adopt workplace-based retirement plans, in addition to helping workers build their retirement savings. Helping small employers offer retirement plans for their workers is the solution to closing the retirement coverage gap. According to the U.S. Small Business Administration, small businesses employ roughly 62 million Americans, totaling roughly 46 percent of all private sector employees. \6\ Recent data shows that only 40 to 50 percent of small employers (i.e., employers with fewer than 50 employees) offered retirement plans, compared to 70-79 percent of employers with 50 to 99 employees and 78 to 91 percent of employers with over 100 employees. \7\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \6\ U.S. Small Business Administration SBA, Office of Advocacy, ``Frequently Asked Questions About Small Business.'' United States, 2018. Available at: http://tinyurl.com/3vyjusb5. \7\ See Bureau Labor Statistics, ``Employee Benefits in the United States, March 2023,'' Historical Tables. Many small employers would like to offer retirement benefits to their workers, but they often face significant time and financial constraints that make it impossible. Fortunately, SECURE 2.0 includes a variety of provisions designed to reduce the cost and administrative burdens associated with administering a retirement plan, in addition to --------------------------------------------------------------------------- streamlining the enrollment process for employees. First, SECURE 2.0 created the Starter 401(k) plan, which is a new wage deferral-only simple safe harbor 401(k) plan. This plan allows employees to save up to $6,000 per year (with a $1,000 catch-up contribution) in a tax-preferred retirement account but is far less expensive and does not have the same level of administrative complexity as a traditional 401(k) plan. This is largely because the Starter 401(k) plan does not require employer contributions and avoids expensive and complicated testing requirements. As a result, small employers with significant time and financial constraints can offer these plans and help their workers start saving for retirement. This will help close the retirement coverage gap because it will bring access to an employer-sponsored retirement plan to millions of workers, many of whom are moderate-income individuals and racial minorities. Second, SECURE 2.0 included a dramatic expansion to startup tax credits available for employers that want to adopt a retirement plan for their employees. For taxable years after 2022, this expanded credit covers 100 percent of the employer's out-of-pocket plan costs, increased from the SECURE Act's 50 percent limit. Qualified employers with 51 to 100 employees may receive a credit covering 50 percent of out-of-pocket plan costs. Just like Starter 401(k) plans, these tax credits will help close the coverage gap by removing the financial barriers that make it difficult for many small businesses to offer retirement benefits. Third, SECURE 2.0 now requires plans established after December 29, 2022, to add an automatic enrollment feature to the plan no later than the 2025 plan year. While this is an administrative complexity, SECURE 2.0 includes a tax credit that will provide $500 for small employers for implementing this feature. A recent report by researchers at Vanguard found that among new hires, participation rates triple to 91 percent under automatic enrollment, compared with 28 percent under voluntary enrollment. \8\ This data shows that automatic enrollment can have an incredibly powerful impact on participant saving which can be leveraged to help close the retirement plan coverage gap. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \8\ Jeffrey W. Clark and Jean A. Young, Automatic Enrollment: The power of the default, February 2021, available at: https:// institutional.vanguard.com/iam/pdf/ISGAE-022020.pdf. Finally, SECURE 2.0 also included a provision establishing the Saver's Match, which will replace the Saver's Credit in 2027. Rather than a credit against taxes owed, the Saver's Match will be deposited directly into the worker's retirement account. Importantly, more savers will be eligible for this matching contribution than the Saver's Credit thanks to expanded income limits. Under this new provision, eligible savers would get a 50 percent matching contribution on up to $2,000 in retirement savings annually. These expanded income thresholds mean that over 108 million Americans are now eligible for the Saver's Match, which includes millions of gig workers and certain government employees, such as public-school teachers, many of whom do not --------------------------------------------------------------------------- participate in plans with matching contributions. Overall, SECURE 2.0 along with provisions in SECURE 1.0, will greatly reduce the retirement plan coverage gap. A number of these provisions were only effective a few months ago and a few provisions have yet to take effect. We applaud the bipartisan work behind SECURE 1.0 and SECURE 2.0 and look forward to working with Congress to ensure the provisions are successful in increasing retirement security in America. State Plans Are Also Helping to Close the Coverage Gap In recent years, state governments have taken steps to close the retirement plan coverage gap in their jurisdictions by enacting state auto-IRA programs. So far, 15 states have adopted auto-IRA programs, and several others are actively considering similar proposals. These state auto-IRA programs generally require businesses over a certain size to provide their workers with access to some type of retirement plan. If employers do not already offer a workplace-based retirement plan, or do not want to adopt one available to them in the private marketplace, then they must enroll their workers in a state-run auto-IRA program. Enrolling workers into these auto-IRA programs is very inexpensive and is not labor-intensive, both of which are important to the success of these programs. Both workers and small businesses benefit from these auto-IRA programs. Nearly all small businesses that do not have a retirement plan want to offer one for their employees. After conducting a survey of small business owners, Pew Charitable Trusts found that 86 percent of small-to medium-sized employers without plans support the concept of a payroll deduction retirement plan with automatic enrollment. Among small employers without plans, 51 percent said they would start their own plan rather than enroll workers in the state-facilitated program. \9\ \9\ Pew Charitable Trusts, Small Business Views on Retirement Savings Plans, January 2017, available at: https://www.pewtrusts.org/ en/research-and-analysis/issue-briefs/2017/01/small-business-views-on- retirement-savings-plans. Accordingly, ARA supports these state auto-IRA plans specifically because they strike the appropriate balance between closing the coverage gap and not overwhelming small employers. In conjunction with SECURE 2.0, the ARA believes that these state auto-IRA programs will help close the coverage gap by expanding employer-based retirement coverage to millions of working Americans across the country. Auto-IRA will further Close the Coverage Gap The ARA also supports the creation of a Federal auto-IRA program which will build upon the successful state-run programs. In February, Ranking Member Neal (D-MA) of the House Ways and Means Committee introduced H.R. 7293, the Automatic IRA Act of 2024. Similar to the state auto-IRA programs, this bill would require employers with more than 10 employees to automatically enroll their employees in a auto-IRA plan or qualified retirement plan, such as a 401(k). This bill includes a tax credit of $500 per year for 3 years for employers of up to 100 employees that offer an auto-IRA product, including those facilitated through a state program. Additionally, SECURE 2.0's startup credit can be used to cover the costs of starting up their own qualified retirement plan. This means that most small businesses will not have to spend any money to comply with this legislation and provide their workers with access to an employer-based retirement plan. Additionally, the Auto-IRA Act will buttress state efforts to close the coverage gap, not preempt them. As drafted, businesses that participate in certain state-based auto-IRA programs are also exempt from compliance. This means that states with mandatory auto-IRA programs can continue to run their programs, in addition to ensuring that workers in states without Auto-IRA programs have access to an employer-based retirement plan. Accordingly, the ARA supports the Auto-IRA Act because it strikes the right balance to close the retirement plan coverage gap while imposing the minimum possible burden on small-to medium-sized employers. The Retirement Savings for Americans Act Will Decimate the Employer Sponsored Retirement System The ARA vigorously opposes the Retirement Savings for Americans Act (S. 3102/H.R. 6065) which would create a new Federal Government-managed fund, called the American Worker Retirement Fund (``Fund''), for qualifying workers that do not have access to a workplace-based retirement plan. While the proposal is a well-intentioned attempt to address the retirement plan coverage gap, it is impractical, unfair, prohibitively expensive, and ripe for political abuse. The most concerning feature of this proposal is the inclusion of the taxpayer-funded Government Match provision, which is only accessible to individuals who do not currently have access to an employer-sponsored retirement plan. The inclusion of a Government Match creates a perverse incentive for employers, particularly small employers with razor-thin margins, to shutter their existing retirement plans so that their workers are eligible to be enrolled in the Fund. This would harm certain retirement savers because many of these plans that would be eliminated have more generous employer matching rates than the Government Match. This proposal would also have a devastating impact on financial literacy and retirement planning advice, specifically for workers who lose access to their workplace-based retirement plan because of this proposal. Plan advisors, recordkeepers, consultants, and third-party administrators who work with plan sponsors and participants alike to ensure that both the employer and employee have the best information available to make informed financial decisions. These service providers engaged with employer-sponsored retirement plans routinely meet with participants to educate them and help them develop their retirement strategy. Because everybody's retirement objectives are different, having this level of access to a retirement plan professional is a tremendous advantage for workers with access to them. The same quality of advice, communication materials and other resources simply will not exist in the government-run retirement fund. Unfortunately, some academics believe the employer should not provide a retirement plan to employees. Teresa Ghilarducci, who is testifying at this hearing, has specifically stated that the relationship should be between the government and the worker when it comes to saving for retirement. In a recent Yahoo Finance article dated January 30, 2024, Ms. Ghilarducci is quoted in saying ``There's a bill in Congress--from Senators Hickenlooper, Tillis, Congresswoman Sewell, and Congressman Smucker--that calls for a government match. It gets the individual employer out of it and focuses on the worker and the government.'' We respectfully disagree with Ms. Ghilarducci's opinion and believe that the employer plays a pivotal role in ensuring Americans save for a secure retirement. Conclusion The employer-sponsored retirement system has helped millions of workers secure a comfortable retirement. The system works because it provides employers with options on the best retirement plan for their employee population, whether it is a defined contribution plan or a defined benefit plan. We look forward to working with the Members of this Committee on ways to continue to expand the workplace retirement plan system to ensure all Americans have access to a retirement plan at work. ______ American Council of Life Insurers, Washington DC, February 28, 2024. Hon. Bernie Sanders, Chairman, Hon. Bill Cassidy, Ranking Member, U.S. Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions, 428 Dirksen Senate Office Building, Washington, DC. Dear Chairman Sanders and Ranking Member Cassidy: On behalf of the American Council of Life Insurers, thank you for holding the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions hearing entitled: Taking a Serious Look at the Retirement Crisis in America: What Can We Do to Expand Defined Benefit Pension Plans for Workers? We appreciate your continued support and leadership on keeping the focus on retirement security. ACLI advocates on behalf of 275 member companies dedicated to providing products and services that promote consumers' financial and retirement security. Financial security is our core business, and retirement security for all Americans is a critical mission. We protect 90 million American families with financial products that reduce risk and increase financial security, including life insurance, annuities, retirement plans, long-term care insurance, disability income insurance, dental and vision benefits, and other supplemental benefits. As society and work change, we are committed to providing financial security solutions that protect all Americans, regardless of where and how they work, their stage in life, or the economic status of their household. Americans are living longer, and financial security in retirement is a big challenge facing our Country. Life insurers help people achieve their financial and retirement security goals, through products that are available, accessible, and affordable to all. ACLI members represent 93 percent of industry assets in the United States. Through a well-crafted partnership of the private solutions ACLI members provide, and public solutions that are necessary, we believe the benefits of financial security can be made available to all Americans. Accordingly, ACLI member companies offer insurance contracts and investment products and services to employment-based retirement plans (including defined benefit pension plans, 401(k), SIMPLE, SEP, 403(b), and 457(b) plans) and to individuals (through IRAs and annuities). Three out of five small employers--those with 99 or fewer employees--rely on life insurers' products and services in their employment-based retirement plans. ACLI members are also sponsors of retirement plans for their own employees. And there are more than 15 million annuity-based IRAs held by individuals. As product and service providers, as well as plan sponsors, life insurers understand that by adequately and consistently saving for retirement, effectively managing assets throughout retirement and utilizing appropriate financial protection products, Americans can supplement Social Security and ensure retirement and financial security for life. Americans face significant financial security challenges, and the life insurance industry plays a critical role in helping them plan, save and secure a guaranteed income in retirement. In 2022, American families received $422.9 billion in payments from annuities, $138.2 billion in payments from life insurance, $21.6 billion in disability income insurance benefits and $13.3 billion in long-term care insurance benefits. \1\ ACLI No other financial institutions provide Americans with the level of financial guarantees offered by life insurance companies. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \1\ ACLI analysis of 2022 NAIC Annual Statement data. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- Guaranteed Lifetime Income Products are Critical Retirement Savings Tools in Today's Retirement Landscape Planning for retirement continues to remain a challenge for many Americans. Fewer companies offer traditional lifetime pension benefits to new employees. More Americans rely on 401(k) plans and similar defined contribution retirement savings plans at work. Americans are living longer--sometimes 30 years or more after they retire. For many, Social Security's protected income is not enough for a secure retirement. These savers will need additional guaranteed lifetime income. That is why retirement savers are increasingly turning to annuities as part of their plan for long-term financial security. An annuity is a contract between a consumer and a life insurance company. The consumer pays the insurer, which then pays the consumer per the terms specified in the contract. Annuities allow retirement savers to replicate a pension plan's guaranteed lifetime income stream. And unlike traditional defined benefit plans, in which the employer assumes the financial risk, with an annuity, the insurance company assumes the financial risk. There are several types of annuities, with different features that can best fit the needs of different financial objectives. An immediate annuity provides immediate access to income in exchange for a lump sum. If retirement is still years away, a deferred annuity will help grow your savings until you are ready to begin receiving payments. Annuities are the only individual financial product that offer a guarantee of lifetime income and the peace of mind that comes from knowing that one will never outlive her retirement savings. Stringent state and Federal consumer protections regulate the sale of annuities. Since 2020, 42 states, covering nearly 80 percent of U.S. consumers, have adopted the new enhanced consumer protections in the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) updated model regulation on annuity transactions. ACLI expects all states to adopt this increased standard by 2025. The NAIC updated model regulation aligns with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission's Regulation Best Interest. These state and Federal efforts protect moderate-income retirement savers, unlike the Department of Labor's fiduciary-only proposal that would eliminate the option for retirement savers without the financial means or minimum account balances to hire a fiduciary to work with financial professionals compensated on a commission basis. Guarding against running out of money during retirement is paramount. This year marks the beginning of ``Peak 65,'' the largest surge of retirement age Americans turning 65 in American history. A record 4.1 million Americans are turning 65 this year. Over 4 million Americans will turn 65 each year through 2027, with more than 11,200 Americans retiring every day. A recent study conducted by Morning Consult for ACLI found that retirement savers are interested in taking steps to protect their savings through retirement. More than half (54 percent) say the current economy has them considering independently purchasing a guaranteed lifetime income product that pays out like a pension and nearly three quarters (73 percent) express interest in independently purchasing a guaranteed lifetime income product that pays out like a pension, including 68 percent who do not already have a pension. \2\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \2\ Morning Consult conducted a nationwide, online survey of 1,003 employed adults planning for retirement between the ages of 45 and 65 on behalf of the American Council of Life Insurers (ACLI). The survey took place May 10 through May 15, 2023 and has a margin of error of plus or minus 3 percent found at: https://consumerprotection.life/wp- content/uploads/2023/05/2305054-ACLI-Retirement-Planning-CT-FINAL- 3.pdf. With the reduction of defined benefit plans in the marketplace, it's important to consider that annuities are the only way savers can secure lifetime income in retirement through the private sector. Annuities provide a ``private pension'' like what beneficiaries would enjoy through their defined benefit pension plan. Policies should continue to evolve to promote savings and address longevity protection by increasing access to lifetime income options, removing barriers to annuities in qualified retirement plans, with the aim to create a more financially inclusive retirement landscape and one that provides opportunities for greater retirement security. Congress Should Expand on its Successful Track Record with Continued Bipartisan Retirement Policy Legislation Fortunately, retirement security policy legislation has historically been a bipartisan endeavor. The most impactful reforms have come from across-the-isle collaboration aimed at increasing Americans' retirement savings. The passage of the Setting Every Community Up for Retirement Enhancement (SECURE) Act of 2019, and the SECURE 2.0 Act in 2022, were the most comprehensive retirement packages passed since the Pension Protection Act in 2006 and are proving instrumental in increasing access to retirement plans. Additionally, these new laws took numerous steps to not only improve access to lifetime income, but to ease burdensome regulations that overcomplicated the use of these products. For instance, boosting retirement security for employees at small firms and part-time workers was a big part of these efforts. We expect the benefits of the original SECURE Act and the SECURE 2.0 Act to be fully felt over several years but here is what we are seeing now: In 2019, prior to the enactment of the original SECURE Act, 48 percent of those employed by a small private sector business (less than 50 workers) had access to a defined contribution plan. In 2023, 52 percent of those employed by a small private sector business (less than 50 workers) had access to a defined contribution plan. In 2019, prior to the enactment of the original SECURE Act, 35 percent of all part-time workers had access to a defined contribution plan. In 2023, 40 percent of all part-time workers had access to a defined contribution plan. \3\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \3\ Bureau of Labor Statistics, National Compensation Survey, accessed on January 25, 2024. Still, there is more work to be done. Both the House and Senate lawmakers are at work to build upon this progress, and we ask policymakers to continue to look at how public support can spur private action to help Americans save for and guarantee a more secure retirement. Policymakers should continue to encourage retirement savings and support guaranteed income options for retirement. Focusing on ways to help more people achieve a financially secure retirement-- increasing savings rates, access to workplace-based retirement plans and lifetime income security for all Americans, are all key to --------------------------------------------------------------------------- financial security. As Congress continues to look for opportunities to increase Americans' financial security, one critical element is the removal of barriers to guaranteed lifetime income products. Removing barriers to annuities, as well as modernizing existing law, provides savers with the option to ensure they have income for life. Public policy changes to increase access to and information about annuities through the workplace plans and beyond help to build a financial safety net that is critical in retirement. Pension Risk Transfer Protects Pension Beneficiaries Congress has long recognized an annuity issued by a life insurance company as the only permissible substitute for an employer's pension obligations. The Department of Labor's Interpretative Bulletin 95-1 provides guidance to ERISA fiduciaries when selecting an annuity provider for the transfer of pension plan benefit obligations. The SECURE 2.0 Act directed the Secretary of Labor to review and, in consultation with the Advisory Council on Employee Welfare and Pension Benefit Plans, determine if amendments are warranted to Interpretative Bulletin 95-1. Employers who do not want to continue assuming the risk of maintaining a defined benefit plan have the ability to enter into a pension risk transfer arrangement with an insurance company--thereby transferring the risk to the insurance company while ensuring that plan participants and retirees receive the exact retirement benefit they have earned. Robust and extensive state regulation and oversight to ensure that insurers can fulfill their long-term promises to customers. State insurance regulators use a variety of tools and confidential disclosures to supervise solvency issues and assess risks for both the insurer and from the broader holding company, when an insurer is part of a group. \4\ This system has proved highly effective: since the 2008 financial crisis, no insurance company has failed to make a life annuity payment to a plan participant following a pension risk transfer. \5\ That track record is a function of the robust reserving and capital standards applied to insurers. Any additional Department of Labor guidance should recognize this strong solvency regime and not hinder employers' efforts to purchase annuities to protect private pensions for their plan participants and beneficiaries. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \4\ NAIC, State Insurance Regulation, (2021) available at: https:/ /content.naic.org/sites/default/files/inline-files/topics-white-paper- hist-ins-reg.pdf. \5\ National Organization of Life Health Guaranty Associations (``NOLGHA''), Consumer Protection Comparison, The Federal Pension System and the State Insurance System (2016), available at https:// www.nolhga.com/resource/code/file.cfm'ID=2559. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- Conclusion The dedication of the Senate HELP Committee to advancing meaningful retirement security policy has had real-world, positive implications for savers. The current success of the retirement system can be improved further with even greater access and savings for all Americans. Public policy should continue to evolve to ensure low-income earners, part-time workers, and others can save at work. America's life insurers continue to support policies that enable all Americans to have access to information about more savings options, and the benefits of guaranteed lifetime income through annuities. Thank you for your leadership on bipartisan policy solutions to increase retirement savings in America. We look forward to continued collaboration on retirement security policy efforts. Sincerely, Susan K. Neely, President & CEO. ______  QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD Response by Teresa Ghilarducci, and Eric Stevenson to Questions of Senator Hickenlooper senator hickenlooper Question 1. for Dr. Teresa Ghilarducci: Professor, New School for Social Research. In my home state of Colorado, nearly 1 million workers do not have access to employer-sponsored retirement savings plans. More concerning, according to the Federal Reserve the bottom 50 percent of the wealth distribution has a median retirement savings of $0! We need more innovative retirement savings options so low income Americans can build wealth. What do retirement savings plans need to look like to make them work for low income workers? Y Follow-up: Would Senator Tillis and I's Retirement Savings for Americans Act help low income individuals, particularly those from underserved communities, who face barriers to saving for retirement? Answer 1. The Retirement Savings for Americans Act (RSAA) would unequivocally help low-and moderate-income workers save for retirement and retire with security. RSAA, modeled after the proven and successful Thrift Savings Plan available to all Federal workers, includes many of these key principles and features of a sound retirement system, such as automatic enrollment, a generous matching contribution, portability, low fees, easy to understand investment options, and good returns. After 40 years of matched contributions and a reasonable rate of return, someone earning $30,000 annually without leaking could retire with about $600,000 in savings paid out in an annuity (This estimate assumes that someone contributes 5 percent of their annual income and receives a 5-percent match, that the account has a 7-percent annual return, and that there are no early withdrawals.) Importantly, it would do all of this without crowding out what is working well in the private system. This is a policy aimed at tackling the last remaining access gap that is highly cost efficient, and it has garnered the broadest support I have seen for a retirement proposal that is specifically aimed at closing the coverage gap for all workers. The range of bipartisan cosponsors and diverse organizations that have endorsed this legislation--from small business organizations to gig platforms to financial titans and the AARP--far surpasses that of any other proposal of this nature that I've studied throughout my career. Question 2. for Eric Stevenson: President of Retirement Solutions, Nationwide. Knowing that small businesses employ nearly half of the employees in the U.S., I was proud that two bills I authored aimed at reducing costs for small businesses looking to start a retirement plan were enacted into law. How are companies like yours helping small businesses leverage opportunities in Secure 2.0 to increase retirement plan coverage for their workers? Answer 2. There are multiple benefits of SECURE 2.0 to assist small businesses as they work to provide coverage for their employees. Nationwide is focused on helping those small businesses in three ways: implementing the provisions, educating financial professionals and plan sponsors, and promoting the benefits to plans to encourage adoption. The enhancement of startup credits for starting up new plans, initially introduced in the original SECURE Act, can play a large role in helping small businesses to increase coverage for employees. By decreasing the initial startup cost, one of the largest hurdles to adoption is removed. Nationwide has promoted these tax credits to financial professionals to share with potential startup plans and delivered an industry-wide podcast discussing these benefits, as well as other provisions. The retirement industry is also embracing the SECURE 2.0 provision that opens the opportunity for 403(b) plans--generally sponsored by charities, educational institutions and non-profits--to participate in Multiple Employer Plans and Pooled Employer Plans (MEPs and PEPs). Nationwide and our industry peers can support these valuable opportunities for employers of close industry affiliations or similar demographics looking to group together and offer retirement benefits to their employees, thereby offsetting costs and regulatory burdens. The work done in both the SECURE Act and SECURE 2.0 to simplify the filings and administrative burdens of MEPs and PEPs has cleared the way for wider adoption of these types of plans. In addition to increasing access through company benefits, employees will also benefit from auto-enrollment requirements, thereby increasing employee participation across businesses of all sizes. Nationwide is encouraging existing plans to offer auto-enrollment now so they will see the same benefits that new plans beginning in 2025 will see when auto-enrollment becomes a requirement. Nationwide will not only be implementing key required and optional provisions, similar to these, but will continue to participate in outreach programs with financial professionals and plan sponsors to promote the benefits of retirement plan access to employers and their employees. Question 3. for Dr. Teresa Ghilarducci: Professor, New School for Social Research. As policymakers, we have to decide best how to allocate resources. Every year the tax code offers $276 billion in retirement tax incentives, but less than 1 percent goes to workers in the bottom 20 percent. As a result, the government will need to spend $1.3 trillion by 2040 to support workers' with inadequate retirement savings. This is why I introduced the Retirement Savings for Americans Act with Senator Tillis. Can you please speak to how the bill would address both of these concerns if it became law? Answer 3. The Federal Government offers generous tax benefits to incentivize retirement savings among higher-income workers, but those benefits are poorly targeted to low-and middle-income workers-- precisely those who are at the greatest risk of financial insecurity. A 021 CBO report showed that tax expenditures for pensions and retirement savings were $276 billion, ranking near the very top of all expenditures. Fully 84 percent of these subsidies went to households in the top two income quintiles. And just 19 percent of households in the bottom income quintile benefited from these incentives, compared to 77 percent in the top income quintile. The Retirement Savings for Americans Act would help rebalance our upside-down retirement system by offering retirement accounts to all workers who don't have access to one through work, and providing a matching contribution of up to 5 percent for low-and-moderate income workers only. This generous match will incentivize lower income workers to save for retirement. We estimate that a worker making an average of $30,000 a year who saves 5 percent for 40 years and earns typical returns could have about $600,000 saved for retirement. This, of course, would meaningfully boost the standard of living for the half of all households who are expected to have to take a standard of living cut in retirement because of a lack of savings. It would also reduce reliance on other government and social safety net programs because these workers would now have a significant nest egg to draw on in retirement, allowing them to live out their golden years with more dignity and security. All of this can be achieved for a fraction of the overall expenditures we already outlay for retirement savings, making this a highly cost-effective proposal. ______ Response by Teresa Ghilarducci to Questions of Senator Markey senator markey Question 1. Today, more than 48 million Americans are providing crucial care to family members--and many of these caregivers and receivers are older and retired Americans. These caregivers are providing $600 billion in direct unpaid care each year, and many of them have to sacrifice their own income to provide care to their loved ones. How does the retirement crisis make it more difficult for Americans to receive care and for family caregivers to provide care? Answer 1. There is considerable research on who gives care to needy elderly and who among elders who need care actually gets the long term care they need. And sadly, who does not. Since our programs are set up for either Medicaid financing or self-financing the middle class is at the greatest risk of not getting the care they need in old age--the poor have Medicaid and the rich have money. But, just as important the secondary effect of a spotty and incomplete provision for long term care is more Adult kids drain their own retirement accounts and cut back work reproducing even more retirement insecurity. Middle aged women, especially, need to drop out of the labor force to care for elders. This means that the lack of long-term care insurance is creating new generations of fragile future elderly. The impact of having to care for elderly fall especially on women and nonwhite workers. Spousal care can also drain the health and wealth of the survivor. Without long term care insurance for the broad middle class, old age is financially risky which generates fear and shame. Neurologists and psychologist researchers identify these emotions as auger for depression and anxiety. The time of life that could be full of reflection, reckoning, and generativity (see Erik Erickson) is full of patching up holes in care and money. These conditions militate against dignity. People in old age need stable income and stable source of health care including long term care. Policy recommendation include ensuring that older workers have a significant. Resources: Forden, J; (2023) ``Effect of Elder Caregiving on Labor Force Participation'' Schwartz Center for Economic Policy Analysis and Department of Economics, The New School for Social Research, SCEPA Working Paper Series 2023-3. Question 2. Many family caregivers do not receive financial support for their caregiving responsibilities, yet they must sacrifice work or educational opportunities. Consequently, they may spend out of their own saving or be at greater risk of financial insecurity, perpetuating the cycle of retirement insecurity. Several Federal agencies--including the Department of Veterans Affairs--provide stipends to caregivers. How do financial supports, such as stipends, for family caregivers support middle class seniors and their families? Answer 2. Without long term care insurance for the broad middle class, old age is financially risky which generates fear and shame. Neurologists and psychologist researchers identify these emotions as auger for depression and anxiety. The time of life that could be full of reflection, reckoning, and generativity (see Erik Erickson) is full of patching up holes in care and money. These conditions militate against dignity. People in old age need stable income and stable source of health care including long term care. Question 3. Middle class seniors hoping to age with dignity are often caught in the eponymous middle--without access to Medicaid or sufficient savings for adequate care. These older Americans and their families face stressful and difficult choices about how to manage care and maintain financial stability across generations, while navigating a patchwork of Federal and state programs. Federal grants to state and cities for financial planning services can allow families to navigate their eligibility for Federal and state benefits, care options, and managing their budget and estate planning. How can these programs support families navigating a patchwork of Federal and state programs to access information and benefits for long term financial security? Answer 3. Having just attended the 2024 American Society of Aging conference in San Francisco, browsing the exhibition booths and going to the sessions I have concluded that millions of people needing support because of the health or financial fragility of an elder in a family is broken. Many services and navigators are for profit and they had the best swag available at the conference. Other exhibitors were tiny charities providing care for specific body parts of million of seniors who aren't even covered by Medicare or Medicaid. A popular booth was the FTC booth instructing about illegal financial fraud. The attendees of the conference were mostly social workers who are trying to navigate these systems for tens of millions of elders. But the conclusion over and over in the conference is without a Federal program supporting long term care and funding innovations in at home care these patchwork systems will leave behind many middle class people. ______  