KEEPING OUR PROMISE TO OLDER
ADULTS AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES:
THE STATUS OF SOCIAL SECURITY TODAY
----------
Wednesday, March 20, 2024
U.S. Senate
Special Committee on Aging
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:06 a.m., Room
562, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Robert P. Casey, Jr.,
Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
Present: Senator Casey, Blumenthal, Warnock, Fetterman,
Braun, Rick Scott, Vance, and Ricketts.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR
ROBERT P. CASEY, JR., CHAIRMAN
The Chairman. Good morning, everybody. The Senate Special
Committee on Aging will come to order. The title of today's
hearing is, Keeping Our Promise to Older Adults and People with
Disabilities. The Status of Social Security Today.
Today, we will hear from Social Security Administration
Commissioner Martin O'Malley. We are grateful you are here.
Commissioner O'Malley was confirmed in December of last year,
and I don't think I have to remind anyone in this room or
listening how important this program called Social Security is.
It will serve over 68 million Americans this year, the
majority of whom are retired Americans and their families.
Without Social Security benefits, experts estimate that about
four in ten older Americans will have incomes below, below the
poverty line.
That means that millions of Americans, including 640,000
Pennsylvanians, are lifted out of poverty solely because of
Social Security. Social security also serves people with
disabilities. In January of this year, Social Security provided
almost $12 billion in disability benefits to 8.5 million
beneficiaries.
Unfortunately, while our population has aged and the demand
for Social Security has increased, support for the Social
Security Administration has diminished greatly. As a result,
the Administration, SSA, has been drastically underfunded,
creating some real challenges for the agency, from increased
wait times for service and approval for disability benefits, to
overpayments and underpayments.
That has added a tremendous pressure on the Social Security
Administration workforce. At the end of Fiscal Year 2022, the
agency was at a 25-year staffing low, with a new low expected
at the end of this Fiscal Year, and employees are being asked
to take on more work of greater complexity.
We should be working tirelessly to support SSA staff,
including field office staff, for their dedication in an
increasingly demanding environment. That means getting the
training to do the job and do the job well and providing
employees the support that they need.
To that end, Commissioner, I will be sending you a letter
today with Senator Fetterman about support for the SSA
workforce, including some challenges that SSA employees in
Pennsylvania have encountered in getting approval for
reasonable accommodations.
Supporting the SSA workforce will also mean better
supporting Social Security beneficiaries. Commissioner, I know
that in your first few months on the job, you focus your
significant attention on listening to SSA staff and
stakeholders, and I am eager today to hear more about what you
have learned.
I want to hear about your goals and your plans to bring
about change at the Social Security Administration. However,
without adequate funding and legislative remedies, delivering
on those goals and fixing existing problems will be really
difficult. As such, I will continue to push for robust funding
for SSA, which will support investments in technology, hiring,
and retention.
While we work to improve the benefit delivery process, it
is critical we increase Social Security benefits across the
board. That is why I support efforts in the Senate that will
increase benefits, like the repeal of the windfall elimination
provision and the Government pension offset, which penalize
workers who have dedicated their lives to public service.
I am also pushing for passage of my SWIFT Act, which would
increase benefits for widows and widowers. In addition, today I
am introducing the Boosting Benefits and COLAs for Seniors Act
along with Senators Blumenthal, Fetterman, Welch, Gillibrand,
and Sanders.
This legislation will change how Cost of Living Adjustments
for Social Security benefits are calculated and ensuring that
benefit adjustments are robust and reflective of the true cost
incurred by older adults.
We must protect and strengthen Social Security so that
Americans of every generation can continue to access this
essential lifeline. I look forward to working with Commissioner
O'Malley to improve Social Security for all Americans.
Now I will turn to Ranking Member Braun for his opening
remarks.
STATEMENT OF SENATOR MIKE BRAUN, RANKING MEMBER
Senator Braun. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Commissioner
O'Malley, good to have you here. Social security is obviously
the bedrock for millions of Americans and was a key part of the
first Aging Committee's hearing in 1961.
Today, the Social Security Administration, I think, has a
customer service issue. We have billions of dollars of payments
that are overpayments, claw backs, other issues, 800 number
waiting times, all things that we need to do better.
It is a big business within the Federal Government, and you
got an issue like WEP GPO, which penalizes retirees for
choosing public service careers. WEP and GPO can cut benefits
in half for public servants like police officers, who often
supplement their service with a second career. We need to pass
the Social Security Fairness Act to eliminate these provisions.
It has now got 53 co-sponsors, nine Republicans. It is
probably something, if we get our financial house in order,
would be a top priority because it is a case of unfairness. You
have other issues when it comes to WEP GPO, overpayments--
already mentioned that. It took one year for a Hoosier, the
mother of a son with Down's Syndrome on another issue to get a
disability case sorted out.
Along with veterans issues, immigration. Our office back
home in Indiana is constantly handling issues, and a lot of
times with Social Security, it is simply just being able to
talk to somebody on the phone. The President's budget blames
the agency shortfalls for needing more money.
I think it has a lot to do with looking at the processes,
how it is run before we throw more money at it. Between Social
Security and Medicare and Medicaid, they are the structural
drivers of our current deficits, and everybody knows they are
important. Everyone knows they are in peril of not being there
for future generations.
Sadly, we lack the political will to do anything about it.
Our debt, which is the underpinning of this, is out of control.
If we actually were living within our means, building maybe
rainy-day funds, doing things that need to be reinvested back
into making good programs better, I think is probably the key
thing that is going to make all of this more complicated in the
long run.
I got here a little over five years ago, and we were
structurally borrowing $1 trillion a year, which was $0.20 on
every dollar. Now that is up to $0.30 on every dollar, and the
plug-in figure to make all that work is now $1 trillion every
six months.
We cannot run the biggest business in the world that way,
and Social Security being one of the largest programs within
it, we need to make sure we are at least running it
mechanically well.
I am looking forward to the discussion we have here today
about ways to improve it, and I am looking forward too for
everyone that is part of this Federal Government to acknowledge
that we can't borrow money from our kids and grandkids without
having an even bigger problem down the road. Thank you for
being here. I yield back.
The Chairman. Ranking Member Braun, thanks for your opening
remarks. Getting a little echo there. We will see what happens.
Our witness today is Martin O'Malley. Commissioner O'Malley was
nominated by President Biden in July to lead the Social
Security Administration.
In December, he was confirmed by the Senate and was sworn
into office on December the 20th. I think most people know his
background. He was Governor of the State of Maryland, two
terms, Mayor of the city of Baltimore for two terms, a member
of City Council, and also an Assistant State's Attorney, all
exemplary examples of public service, and prior to becoming
Commissioner.
Commissioner, we are grateful you are here today, and I
will turn it over to you and hope that the echo recedes as you
speak.
STATEMENT OF MARTIN O'MALLEY, COMMISSIONER, SOCIAL
SECURITY ADMINISTRATION, BALTIMORE, MARYLAND
Mr. O'Malley. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. It is an
honor to be here and thank you for your leadership. Thank you
for your concern, your compassion for people among us who
really need their neighbors to care about them.
I think all of us in this panel would agree that there
probably is no more important program our country has ever
created that expresses our compassion for our neighbors quite
so much as Social Security.
The good news is that for 88 years, this program has
operated at a pretty high level, lifting a lot of seniors out
of poverty, helping people suffering from disabilities. It is
my great honor to be able to lead the men and women of this
agency forward at a very, very tough time in their history.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, I have been on a learning
curve, a steep learning curve for the last 90 days. I have
visited all nine regions. I have yet to get to the Wilkes-Barre
DOC, but that is next on my list. Thank you for surfacing the
concerns of those hardworking men and women who do such
critical work not just in their own region, but for the whole
country.
I have done town halls with employees in nine different
regions. I did that over 16 days in January. I sat side by side
with workers on the copilot headset, if you will, in the tele-
service centers. Sat on the other side of the glass, as our
frontline workers were interviewing people.
The most important two things I learned were these. Number
one, there is a deep commitment among not only the senior
executive service of Social Security, but throughout the
agency, a deep commitment to the mission of this agency and
that, as former Senator Mikulski said to me, is probably the
most important asset that I have as the new leader in this
agency.
The second thing I learned is this, and I saw the symptoms
of it very acutely on the front lines. Social Security is now
serving more customers than ever before, with fewer staff than
they have had in 27 years, and it is true that our ability to
serve our customers is the intersection of people, process,
some policy, and technology, and all of these things come
together.
Yet, I was surprised to learn that Social Security now
operates on less than one percent of its annual benefit
payments, and this operating overhead has effectively been
reduced by about 20 percent just over the last 10 years. In
other words, in 2018, when you looked at our overhead as
percentage of outlays, it was about 1.2 percent.
In the President's budget, which is a solid step in the
right direction, it is 0.96 of one percent. What is the result
of that? The result is that we are in a customer service crisis
with people waiting on average 38 minutes for the 800 number an
agent to answer their call. People with disability waiting
nearly eight months on average, some States better than others,
but on average eight months for a decision on their initial
application, and then another seven months for the ALJ if they
have to appeal it to an ALJ hearing. Clearly, we can and must
do better. These are some of the things that we are doing about
it and already in motion.
I have put together an outstanding new command staff at
SSA, including Dustin Brown, our Chief Operating Officer, a new
CIO, new head of the Office of General Counsel, Carolyn Colvin,
former Commissioner, returning as Commissioner Emerita.
We launched within 30 days a new performance management
regimen which we call SecurityStat. Instead of having sort of
sleepy one year cadence associated with the budget to make
needed process, people, and performance improvements, we do it
every two weeks, every two weeks, every two weeks.
For one blessed hour, we lock the whirlwind outside the
door, and we focus on the data and the maps that tell us
whether we are doing a better job or not in serving the people
of Indiana, or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or
Connecticut. One of those hours exclusively dedicated to field
operations, the next one exclusively to the 800 number, and so
on.
We tackle other pressing challenges, including the wait
time for initial disability determinations. That is one of the
focused hours. One of them is about fraud, and another one is
about the numerous and oftentimes now incomprehensible notices
that we send to people, the only part of which they can
understand is the last line that says, if you don't understand,
call our 800 number and wait for 39 minutes.
I wanted to touch on one other intense area of focus that
we have been on, and that has to do with the injustices that we
have done to our neighbors when it comes to overpayments and
underpayment.
Many of you probably saw the television journalism piece
done by 60 Minutes highlighting the injustice that we do to
Americans when, through no fault of their own, we overpay them
and then claw back in a rather brutal and summary way 100
percent of their check if they don't call us back to work out a
payment plan.
Congress and the law requires that we make every effort to
recover those payments, but doing so without regard to the
larger purpose of the program can cause grave injustices in
individuals and we have to fix these. today I am announcing
before your Committee, Mr. Chairman, some new reforms.
Many of these reforms came from our own employees on the
front lines. First, instead of intercepting 100 percent of
Social Security benefits when a claimant fails to respond to a
demand for repayment, that default setting will now be 10
percent of withholding, which is what it has long been with
regard to Title 16.
Second, we are going to shift the burden away from asking
the claimant to prove that they were not at fault instead to a
more neutral setting, so that the agency has the responsibility
of putting forward, if they believe that there is some
intention on the part of the claimant or some fault.
Third, we are going to realign our period for repayment,
which traditionally had been 36 months, and we are going to
realign that to what the Veterans Administration does and allow
for a 60-month repayment window, and fourth and finally, for
now, we are going to make it easier for overpaid beneficiaries
to request a waiver of the repayment.
The American people, in conclusion, work their whole lives
to earn the benefits of Social Security, but there is something
else they have already worked for, they have already paid for,
and they have already earned, and that is a decent level of
customer service to access those benefits.
The good news is that if we were allowed once again from
the same FICA dollars which were not paid in a discretionary
way in paychecks, if we were allowed to operate on 1.2 percent,
we could restore customer service in all of your States and we
could do it pretty quickly.
The President's budget invests in Social Security for the
people of our Nation and includes a nine percent increase over
what we were allowed to spend. I hesitate to say appropriation
because we haven't had an appropriations hearing in nine years.
The President's budget includes a nine percent increase
over what we had last year been allowed to spend for our
operating expenses to $15.4 billion, and we look forward to
working with you to sustain funding increases so that we can
get back to serving the people with the customer service they
have already earned, they have already paid for, but they are
being denied, and we can do so without adding a penny to the
deficit. Thank you very much.
The Chairman. Mister, thanks for your opening statement. I
am going to jump ahead. Instead of asking you my question, I
will turn to Senator Blumenthal. Is that okay?
Senator Blumenthal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I really
appreciate you taking me out of order for this really very
important hearing.
Nothing is more vital and important, as you well know,
Commissioner O'Malley, than Social Security to Americans--to
all Americans, not just recipients but to their families, to
their children, because when they are in poverty, their
children and their families suffer as well.
I really want to thank you for your intention to improving
this system. I have a reform proposal that goes to the levels
of benefits, but your focus on customer service certainly is
vital, and the overpayments, the shock and brutality of efforts
by the Government to claw back overpayments is absolutely
unacceptable.
I hope that you will be doing more, even more than what you
said you would be doing to this Committee just now, because
this kind of really unfortunate and unfair treatment of
Americans, when through no fault of their own, they have to
suffer the hardship of claw backs and retrievals of payments
that are the fault of the Government for overpaying.
I want to go to another topic that has concerned me because
I am hearing from constituents about the Windfall Elimination
Program and Government Pension Offset. These two provisions are
separate, both harmful provisions that reduce Social Security
benefits for workers and their eligible family members if the
worker receives or is entitled to a pension based on earnings
from employment not covered by Social Security.
I am sure you are familiar with these provisions that
disproportionately affect public service employees, including
educators, police officers, firefighters, and others. I have
introduced the Social Security 2100 Act that would repeal these
provisions, among other changes that substantially benefit
Social Security recipients, giving them cost of living
increases, imposing fair burdens on people earning more than
$400,000, but what concerns me is, apart from repealing WEP and
GPO, is the failure of some local and State Governments to
disclose the effects of these two provisions on new employees.
I wonder whether you are familiar, whether you have heard
information about disclosure of this information, the two
provisions, the Windfall Elimination Provision and the
Government Pension Offset provision, whether you have heard
from recipients and claimants about their effect, firefighters,
educators, police officers, because the requirement for an
offset really ought to be disclosed to people when they come to
work.
Mr. O'Malley. I would agree with you, Senator. I am sure it
comes as a great shock to a lot of people who put their lives
on the line in public service jobs or other jobs to find out
that as they approach retirement, that the Social Security they
thought might be there isn't going to be there. I have received
some briefings on this.
It is my understanding that over the years, a number of
states were historically allowed to sort of opt out of
requiring FICA payment to employees into Social Security. Now
the dilemma that you have as policymakers is how do we adjust
that moving forward, and what are the equities and the cost of
addressing that, either in a prospective way or in a more
comprehensive way.
I don't know entirely what the answer is, but would look
forward to working with you. We have excellent actuaries. The
amount of data, their capacity to project puts and takes into
the future is really outstanding. I would look forward to
working with you on that, Senator.
Senator Blumenthal. Thank you. I really want to thank you
for your continuing public service, very distinguished career.
Your service in this position is as important as any--what any
of us do because you touched the lives of so many Americans.
I want to extend you the offer of help on my part, and I am
sure my colleagues, to help improve this system that is so
vital to Americans.
Waiting 38, 39 minutes is just intolerable, and not the
fault of the hard working people in the Social Security
Administration, it is the lack of resources that you are
provided, so, we got to do better. Thank you.
Mr. O'Malley. Senator, thank you, and we need your help.
Senator Blumenthal. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Blumenthal. We will turn
next to Senator Braun--Senator Ricketts.
Senator Ricketts. Great. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman,
and thank you, Commissioner O'Malley, for being here today.
Mr. O'Malley. Good to see you again, Senator.
Senator Ricketts. Good seeing you. According to the Social
Security Administration, in 2024, roughly 68 million Americans
per month will receive a Social Security benefit, which is a
total of almost $1.5 trillion over the course of the year.
Over 350,000 Nebraskans receive Social Security benefits,
with a large majority of these individuals being retired.
Many Americans do not know they need to plan for their
benefits to be lower than expected due to Federal taxes. Social
security began tax--being taxed in 1984, and at that time only
about 10 percent of the beneficiaries being taxed.
Now, over 40 percent of the beneficiaries are being taxed
at the Federal level. As Governor of Nebraska, I recognized
that all Social Security benefits should be completely tax
free, and that is why I worked hard to pass a historic law that
would phaseout the State income tax on Social Security benefits
over a period of time.
Due to the success of this Nebraska law, I introduced a
Social Security Tax Cut Act once I entered office here in the
U.S. Senate. Under this plan, a typical senior would save about
$800 a year on taxes, and this would create real relief for
seniors in a time of rising costs and out of control inflation.
By passing this bill, we can take the first step in
boosting the retirement income of millions of seniors in
Nebraska and across this country. Moving on to the issues here.
You put forward a path to improve customer service, so thank
you very much for providing the data. I actually expect a
Governor to want to look at data, so I appreciate that very
much, Mr. Commissioner.
Noted what Senator Blumenthal talked about the 38 minutes
on hold time. When I took over as Governor of Nebraska, in our
economic assistance line, that hold time was nearly 24 minutes,
so, not quite as high, but still not good customer service. I
know you have got also with regard to the time delay on that.
I know you are relatively new into the job. Can you talk a
little about what is your plan to be able to address some of
these issues with regard to customer service, like the whole
time of 38 minutes.
Do you have a goal specifically you are shooting forward to
be able to hit with regards to that hold time and some of the
other goals? What are the steps you are going to take to be
able to get there?
Mr. O'Malley. Yes, sir. Thank you. Let me begin by saying
that the most important thing that we could do and the most
important thing that we could address is this yawning gap
between the ever-rising beneficiaries.
That 68 million number that you cited was also what I cited
during my confirmation just four months ago, but now it is 71
million, so that blue number here continues to go up, but the
staffing is declining now to a 27-year low.
Last year we had a spike, but as you might imagine, if one
of your employees, when you were Governor, was answering a call
after somebody had been on hold for an hour, you know, 39
minutes is the average, they are coming off of that call hot.
Our attrition rate in the tele-service centers is about 24
percent. Many of the people that we hire, leave and a lot of
the questions are not simple questions to answer so they
require some training.
This is what we are doing specifically on the call times.
We have a number of leading actions, as you know, from a
performance management sort of Governor yourself. There are
leading actions that deflect people from the 800 number to
address their concerns in more timely, legitimate ways.
Everything we can do to drive up the numbers of people that
are getting their services online or applying online for a
Social Security card rather than calling the 800 number, those
are examples of deflection.
Examples of call resolution are things that allow us to
answer that call the first time instead of making a person call
back, or perhaps sometimes process or policy changes that allow
the call taker to take an attestation after we have already
identified that they are who they are and what their mother's
maiden name is, and those sorts of things, so that whether they
are calling for a tax form or something else, we can resolve
that on the first call.
There are a host of actions that took many of them I have
experienced and learned of firsthand when I was out there
sitting side by side with people all over the country, and each
of those has an impact on diverting people from the call.
I will give you another one. Lawyers, claimants',
advocates, would call the 800 number--again, and this is kind
of a twofer. This is both deflection and resolution. They would
call to make sure that their entry of appearance, their 1696
form, was accepted by Social Security.
To be sure, they would fax it in, mail it in several times
because there was no way for them to check on their own other
than to send lots of repeat notices, which is wasteful when you
have to do the same one in the same case, or they would call
the 800 number, but because the 800 number was so overwhelmed,
somebody, well-intentioned, said those lawyers can only check
on the status of three cases. We have done two things. One is
to make it possible for them online to see whether we have
accepted their 1696 entry of appearance form.
The second is that if they do happen to call the 800
number, their secretaries are not limited to checking that
status on only three cases, but they can ask for five, six,
seven, eight, so they are not calling back as soon as they hang
up and being on hold again. Those are some of the things we are
doing.
We have struggled with an underperforming new telephone
system that we went into during the pandemic and the shutdown,
and that system has not yet performed as it was promised.
We really do struggle with that. We also struggle with the
attrition rate in our teleservice centers and trying to
continue to provide a level of customer service with less than
one percent operating expenses.
Allstate operates on 22 percent as a percentage of its
outlays. Twenty-two percent overhead--excuse me, I think it is
12 percent. Liberty-biberty, 12 percent. We are less than one
percent. Less than one percent, and it shows. In 2018, we were
1.2 percent, and the customer service was better.
There are a lot of bump hit singles that we are doing on
process improvement and performance management, but it won't
make up for that yawning gap. The good news is Congress could
address that and it won't affect the deficit because people
have already paid for their customer service in the trust fund.
Here is the other good news, if we were allowed to operate
at 1.2 percent, not only would it not add to the deficit, but I
asked the actuary how far would it advance the so-called
depletion date of 2034?
The answer to that is 30 days. This is kind of a self-
inflicted wound. People already paid for their customer
service. They already paid for their benefits. There was
nothing discretionary on their part about it. It was mandatory,
and we could get back to that very quickly.
Senator Ricketts. Well, thank you very much, Mr.
Commissioner, and those are all steps that I think demonstrate
that you got the right idea about how we address and providing
better customer service for our seniors.
I would also just add in there, and we have talked about
this, Lean Six Sigma or another process approved methodology to
look at your process as well, but you were spot on by looking
at the deflection and how we can--you know, in my business
career, in my career as Governor, when you can get people to
use the online services, it is actually a win-win because once
they get used to it, they enjoy it better.
It is better customer satisfaction, and it helps you out
providing service to people in the 800 number.
Mr. O'Malley. I would love for you to come up to a
SecurityStat meeting.
Senator Ricketts. Okay, great.
Mr. O'Malley. You would enjoy it. It is, you know, what you
did as Governor, what I did as Governor, and the Senior
Executive Service has really responded to us. It is every two
weeks, every two weeks, not just looking at the lagging
indicators, but at the leading actions that drive us. There are
a lot of Six Sigma principles in there as well.
Senator Ricketts. Great. We will followup. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Ricketts. Commissioner, I
am going to start on the question of funding. I think that one
of the graphics that you--one of them, I should say the charge
that you included in part of your materials, headline, Staffing
Declines as Beneficiaries Rise, and it says it all.
As you as you made reference to as well in your testimony,
the President requested $15.4 billion for the Social Security
Administration for Fiscal Year 2025, which is a nearly nine
percent increase. For years, the Administration SSA has been
chronically underfunded, as I mentioned. Ultimately, this
underfunding negatively impacts benefit delivery.
Despite this, we have heard extreme proposals from some
that Congress should consider cutting Social Security. I will
never support cuts to Social Security. I think that is a fairly
widespread view. We know that it is a lifeline for Americans of
all walks of life. This is a promise that we have to deliver
on, and I will continue to work to fulfill that promise.
I have two questions, two interrelated questions. How would
flat funding, or even worse, a cut or cuts into funding impact
the Social Security Administration and ultimately
beneficiaries?
Mr. O'Malley. We are struggling as a big human resources
organization where what we do is service. We are customer
service. Our agents in the 1,210 field offices, the hard
working men and women that process claims at the Wilkes-Barre
DOC. It is all people, but technology--granted, some really,
really old technology by the way. Still green screens and
COBOL, you know, at the base of it. This puts me in mind of,
you know, back in Governor days, Senator, if a school system,
which is all their budget is mostly all teachers in the
classrooms, if they have fewer teachers and the number of
students is rising, those classrooms are going to be larger.
By way of analogy, if our staffing is fewer, our wait times
are going to be higher and there are going to be longer lines.
Sometimes people have really, really dire needs, so we have to
get back, and the President's budget takes a really affirmative
step in getting us back to the traditional 1.2 percent that we
operated on prior to 2018, where we had pretty high level of
customer service. I wasn't breaking the bank, and it was
something that people had already paid for.
If we were to receive the $15.4 billion proposed by the
President, that would allow us, we believe, to reduce our 800
number's hold times by 20 minutes. Currently 39 on average in
last Fiscal Year.
We believe we can knock 20 minutes off of that. We would be
able to reduce initial disability claim wait times to 215 days,
and we believe we can reduce the claims backlog by 15 percent.
Another positive step in the right direction and the following
year would allow us to do even better.
We now are trying to serve the highest number of
beneficiaries ever with the lowest staffing we have had in 27
years, and that has not been offset by huge investments in new
technology and those sorts of modernization things.
Ninety percent of our technology budget goes to keeping old
systems functioning rather than doing the upgrades that we need
to.
The Chairman. Wanted to move to a second inquiry about the
employees and morale and just those basic concerns that I think
everyone has expressed over a number of years. As I say,
employees do great work.
Just as you mentioned, in my home State of Pennsylvania,
thousands of payments are processed each month. These payments
are for retired workers and their families, people with
disabilities, widows, widowers, children, yet the number of
beneficiaries grows and staffing for SSA is at a 25 year low.
By the end of Fiscal Year 2024, without any changes,
staffing will be at the lowest level since 1972. Increasing
workloads with limited staffing inevitably results in higher
levels of stress and burnout.
This is causing problems for workers, applicants, and
beneficiaries, leading to higher turnover, backlogs, and
delays. SSA used to be ranked one of the best places to work
and now ranks at the bottom.
Commissioner, you made reference earlier to this, but I
wanted to, you know, to highlight it again or add to it. How
are you engaging SSA employees? I know you have had a number of
town halls and engagements like that, and what is your kind of
broad-based plan to improve staff morale?
I know I am over, but soon as the Commissioner is done with
this answer, I will go to Ranking Member Braun.
Mr. O'Malley. Senator, you kind of hit the nail on the
head. Ten years ago, when we were able to operate on 1.2
percent of our overhead, we were rated as the best place in the
Federal Government to work. Now we are dead last. The pressure
that has been----
The Chairman. Went from best to last.
Mr. O'Malley. We went from best to last. In fact, we have
been last for three years in a row and some people on the FEVS
survey vote with their feet by not even bothering to fill out
the survey again.
I have done nine town halls with employees all across the
country. Not with set remarks, just more Mayoral style, you
know, and what I have felt and what I have seen out there is a
workforce that is exhausted. They are stressed. They are
overworked. The managers feel this pressure intensely as well.
The sense that people don't care that their workloads are just
getting higher and none of their bosses listen.
Nobody in Washington listens. That morale problem then
leads to all sorts of problems affecting the health of the
workers, and if the workers aren't healthy, our customers do
not receive good service.
Here are a few of the things that we are doing. First and
foremost, I have been present, and I have been listening, and
that actually is important. Some people in the town halls have
said, you know, we just haven't had a commissioner that we
could fuss at for so long. Some of the problems are things that
you have got to believe when you are on the front line that
nobody in headquarters cares if they haven't fixed this by now.
We are fixing some of those things, and when we do, we let
people know. We had 1,600 employees respond to the engage
survey that we did right off the bat, and there is one more
thing that we are working on and that has to do with when
people ask for a reasonable accommodation in the work--because
they have a sick child or they have some condition that
requires that reasonable accommodation, that should not linger
and take a year to resolve.
We are doing some reforms on that score as well. I meet
regularly in every month with the Labor Management Council. I
encourage the Regional Commissioners to do the same thing,
because the best ideas I ever received for improving customer
service as a Mayor or a Governor always came from the people on
the front lines doing the work, at the MVAs or the other
places.
Now we have a system that actually listens to them and
implements these changes.
The Chairman. I might just cut you off there only because
we are over.
Mr. O'Malley. Yes, sir.
The Chairman. I will go to Ranking Member Braun.
Senator Braun. I am going to defer to Senator Scott.
The Chairman. All right.
Senator Rick Scott. Thank you, Chairman. Thank you, Ranking
Member Braun. Commissioner, thanks for being here. Thanks for
taking my call. I think all of us probably are dealing with
this overpayment issue, and I know you have got--you have come
up with some proposals, so to do deal with that. Thank you for
doing that.
Mr. O'Malley. Thank you.
Senator Rick Scott. You are aware we were both Governors,
and Senator Braun is going to be a Governor, so, when we--as
the Governor, you have to sort of solve all the problems. It
sounds like you are really focused on the service problems,
which is outstanding that you are doing that, and that is going
to make it--you know, if you are able to get that done, that is
going to make a difference, so thanks for doing that. I just
want to talk about just the fact that it goes bankrupt in 1934.
One thing that surprised me is, we just got President
Biden's fourth budget, and there was nothing in the budget that
actually protects Social Security from the standpoint of it
didn't reduce when it was going to go bankrupt.
There has been nothing in there which has surprised me. I
can't imagine, I don't know, when you walked in, if you had as
Governor, you know, I don't know where your pension plan was,
but you tried to make sure it was fully funded.
Aren't you surprised that there is nothing in the budget to
deal with the solvency issue of Social Security?
Mr. O'Malley. When I was elected Governor, our pension
system was very challenged, was facing an immediate,
unsustainable future and we had to fix that. People weren't
happy about it, but we fixed it.
The depletion event, as the actuaries call it, to
distinguish it from bankruptcy, that is now estimated to be
happening in 2034. That would be the point, if you men and
women of our Congress don't act as your predecessors did about
a month before the last depletion event in 1982, if you don't
act, it is true that Social Security would only have 77 percent
of the dollars that it needs to meet full benefits.
I am not terribly surprised in terms of a formal proposal
from the President, because I know he has been very clear about
his policy position, and I also know that he has consistently
stated his desire to see those that earn more than $400,000
start to pay into Social Security again.
I also know from having gone through the confirmation
process and met with many of you, that there are a lot of ideas
out there. There are some of your bodies who told me we should
try to do this right now.
There are others who said there is no way in the political
dynamics of an election year that things can get solved right
now and we need to do it after the next election. Fortunately,
I no longer have a political job, so those calculations are----
Senator Rick Scott. You are going to get it done.
Mr. O'Malley. Those calculations are not mine to make. They
are yours to make. We have great actuaries and anything, any
way that we can be of help as you think about this, we would be
very responsive and able to do so.
Senator Rick Scott. I am sure you didn't read it. I
proposed a bill that would make sure that we didn't reduce
benefits for Medicare and Social Security, and I can't imagine
doing it without reading the bill. I am not suggesting you sign
off on the bill, but you probably agree with that, right? We
shouldn't be taking people's----
Mr. O'Malley. That is the goal.
Senator Rick Scott. It is not a hard one, is it? Do you
support efforts by Congress to use savings generated on
programs like Medicare or Social Security to pay for other
spending?
Mr. O'Malley. Well, that would be a policy call.
Senator Rick Scott. Do you think we should do that?
Mr. O'Malley. I think we should do whatever it takes to
secure, you know, for the security of the men, women and
children in the Nation, as FDR said.
Senator Rick Scott. Okay. If you--okay, so I will give you
an easy one. Would you allocate any--would you, if you have to
choose, $80 billion to the Social Security Trust Fund or $80
billion TO add more IRS agents. Which one would you choose?
Mr. O'Malley. Well, again, that is a policy choice. What I
would suggest is that you don't even have to choose between the
two, because people have already paid for the 1.2 percent we
need in customer service, and they paid it in their FICA, and
it is already there. We just need to be allowed to use that out
of the trust fund, and if we did, Senator, it would only
advance that depletion event by 30 days.
Senator Rick Scott. One quick question, telework. You have
got, I think you said you have 55,000 employees. How many
people are working and in office versus working from home?
Mr. O'Malley. You know, it depends on the job, and it
depends on the function. I did make an announcement about
adjustments to our telework policies. Can I go into that as
succinctly as I can?
Senator Rick Scott. Commissioner, can you say where it was
before COVID and where it is now?
Mr. O'Malley. Yes. It is an interesting story. To
encapsulate it, at the end of President Obama's Administration,
he encouraged Social Security to make their processing
workloads portable. It was not because he was President and saw
that a pandemic was about to shut us down.
It is because he wanted to reduce carbon footprint, impact
on climate and all of those sorts of things. Social Security
responded, and they made many of their workloads portable,
meaning that they could be done from any place, either at the
office or at home, and thank God they did.
When a new Administration came in, they put an end to that
policy. They said, everybody has to work at a worksite five
days a week, and then about a year later, the pandemic hit, and
they said, oops, everybody go back to work at home. We have had
a lot of whiplash. Ever since the pandemic ended however, all
of the field offices have been open five days a week, 9:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m., five days a week. The employees do three days in
the office, and then two teleworking out of the week.
The managers have to manage that, and some of their work
involves what they call adjudication, the followup stuff, the
processing. It is not all just seeing people through the glass.
You got to process those cases.
I made an announcement on February 2nd that I would of
course be in headquarters five days a week. My command staff,
the people in the Commissioner's office, are four days a week,
one day of telework. Everybody else, three days from telework.
I am sorry, three days onsite, two days on telework.
That also affected all of the headquarters in the nine
different regions of SSA. The computer programmers were two and
three, two days onsite, three of telework, and we hope that
that is going to be a better and more effective balance.
Senator Rick Scott. All right. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Scott. I will turn next to
Senator Warnock. Before Senator Warnock's question, I am going
to have to be out for a period of time, probably about a half
an hour, but between now and then, Senators will be able to
answer questions, and I will be back. I think after Senator
Warnock, we will go to Senator Vance, and then Senator
Fetterman. Somewhere in between there, Senator Braun will be
back, and he will ask his questions. Senator Warnock.
Senator Warnock. Thank you so very much, Chair Casey, for
holding this important hearing. Commissioner O'Malley, it is
great to see you again. Of course, I have known you a long
time, first as Mayor O'Malley when I pastored our church in
Baltimore.
Governor O'Malley, now Commissioner, thank you for your
lifelong commitment to service. My office frequently hears from
Georgians about benefit overpayments and subsequent claw backs.
I know you have talked about that in your opening statement. I
think it is always important that we center the people as we
discuss policy, remember the human face of the issues we talk
about.
A few years ago, Savannah resident, Denise, got a letter
from the Social Security Administration informing her that she
owed the agency $58,000 in overpayments through no fault of her
own.
She wasn't aware of it until she got the notice years
later. She couldn't afford to pay that amount back, and the
agency reduced her monthly benefits to the point where she can
no longer afford her rent. That is the human cost, the human
face of these policy issues and issues that need to be
resolved.
You said one of your priorities is to address overpayments,
and I know you have addressed that to some degree in your
opening statement, but as we think about the question, how does
the agency plan to address this systemic issue, if you were to
outline say the top two or three things that you think about
that need to be done right now to begin to resolve this, what
would those be?
Mr. O'Malley. Yes, sir. This is one of the top--on January
2nd, I sent, now hear this sort of a welcome back after the New
Year's holiday to the command staff, the Senior Executive
Service, and we are in a customer service crisis.
Our top priorities are the 1-800 number, the time it takes
for a disability determination, and third, to address the
injustice we do to real people who, through no fault of their
own, find themselves in a position of having 100 percent of
their benefits that they live on intercepted until they can
make other payment arrangements.
Before I had even been confirmed, there was an outstanding
person assigned to untangle this problem and its impact, as you
said, Senator, on real people, and her name is LeeAnn Stuever.
She has done an outstanding job to help us do a deep dive
and get our heads around what is the universe of people, and
what are the root causes, and what can we do right now so that
our obedience to the congressional mandate that we take actions
to recover overpayments when there has been a mistake doesn't
run contrary to the whole purpose of the Act itself, which is
to keep seniors from being put under a bridge through no fault
of their own.
The top things that we are doing is today I am able to
announce that we are no longer going to have that claw back
cruelty of intercepting 100 percent of a payment if people do
not respond to our notice to call us and work out other terms.
The second thing we are going to do is shift the burden from
asking the claimant to prove that they didn't contribute to it
instead to a neutral position.
If we have reason that says that they were at fault, well,
we should have to produce that reason, not them. Then the third
thing that we are going to do is--actually two more. Third
thing is that just as the VA, when they make mistakes, has a
60-month period to recoup that overpayment--we had been
operating on 36 months.
We are going to extend that to 60. Finally, we are going to
make it easier for people who have received an overpayment to
be able to file for a waiver and have that issue resolved. We
are looking to do more as well.
I am not able to announce that now because a lot of this
involves training and changes to systems so that when people
walk into the 1,210 field offices with an overpayment, they are
properly managed. Those things will all have a big impact on
some of the people who find themselves in the positions like
the woman who called your office.
Senator Warnock. No, it is good to hear the ways in which
you are focused on this and will remain vigilant alongside you
in this effort. People like Denise and others shouldn't have to
be penalized for a situation that they did not create. I see I
have just five seconds so I will end with that. Thank you so
very much.
Mr. O'Malley. Senator, thank you, and for your leadership
and friendship through the years.
Senator Warnock. Thanks.
Senator Vance. Great. Thank you for being here. It is good
to see you, and thanks for your service, Commissioner O'Malley.
I want to thank the Chair and the Ranking Member for hosting
the Committee.
You know, I think almost all of us in our chamber support
Social Security, and we want it to be solvent healthy for
future generations. I wanted to ask a couple of questions. You
know, one, just about wait times.
We have heard from a lot of constituents in the State of
Ohio that, you know, when folks are calling the 800 number,
they are waiting a lot longer than they used to. Hold time for
callers in 2020 was 16 minutes. By 2022, it is 33 minutes.
2023, it is 38 minutes.
Now, that is according to some analysis that my staff
tracked down, and I wonder sort of what is driving that? That
seems like a pretty significant increase in wait times from 16
to 38 minutes in just a couple of years.
Obviously, you know, that is time wasted for a lot of
people. Just curious sort of what is driving that or if you
have any sense of what is causing it.
Mr. O'Malley. Yes, sir. The agency started to move to a new
integrated phone system shortly before the pandemic. When the
pandemic hit, they stopped engines, said, whoa, we just need to
be able to shut down all the field offices immediately because
a lot of people do call the field offices.
Where, by the way, the answer time ranges between three and
five minutes. They needed to have an 800 number up and going
right away because they had kind of moved away from the old one
that had been operated by AT&T. That required a lot of shift.
The long and short of it is the 800 system that we have
today has never fully lived up to what we were promised,
especially when it comes to the business intelligence and the
center of that system that allows calls to be shifted, people
to remain in line, to allow the sort of things that all of your
constituents in Ohio would expect from any other 800 number.
A call back if we are too busy and those things. We have
struggled with that. Additionally, this system has never
provided us with the sort of management intelligence that
allows us to be able to better manage the workload, the peak
times, and distribute them effectively across our 24 different
call centers in different time zones across the country.
Senator Vance. Could I ask, Commissioner, is there a plan
to transition away from that 800 number system or to better
bolster and make it more responsive? Like how are you guys
thinking about responding to the issue?
Mr. O'Malley. We are open to anything that will alleviate
this problem as soon as we can. I was on the phone just two
days ago with the CEO of Verizon, who is the company that we
contracted with. They offered this 800 number.
I am hoping to get some word back from them within the next
24 hours, having in very direct language expressed to them the
failure of their business intelligence to deliver as promised.
There are other approaches, one of which we are using, a Call
Center as a service, and that one seems to have some promising
results.
Ultimately, as you can appreciate, where we need to head is
to a system with modern customer relations management. When
that person in the tele-center gets a call from Mr. O'Malley,
they are able to have the screen in front of them, see what my
concerns are, when I called before, not to have to ask my name,
address, and Social Security number, all of those sorts of
things.
Those are some of the challenges that we have had. Having
said that, at our last SecurityStat meeting, we had reduced the
call wait time to 31 minutes. Now, it is nothing to write home
about, but it is better than 39.
Senator Vance. Better directionally, sure. I am mindful of
my limited time here, but, you know, we would love to work with
your staff and try to address that issue. If you guys have
particular ideas, certainly bring them to us, because we would
like to be helpful, and with that, I will yield back the
remainder to the ranking member and appreciate you being here.
Mr. O'Malley. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Braun. Senator Fetterman.
Senator Fetterman. Governor, good to see you again. I just
want to acknowledge, you enjoyed a very strong bipartisan vote
to bring you on, correct?
Mr. O'Malley. Thank you. I did.
Senator Fetterman. That is a testament to your career and
how serious you take this job.
Mr. O'Malley. Thank you.
Senator Fetterman. Twenty-five years ago, I was a graduate
student at the Kennedy School, and we were tasked with a policy
analysis exercise. They were--they charged us to now, to
evaluate and to implement a program to privatize Social
Security.
I was like, wow, that is kind of crazy. I always thought
that Social Security was very sacred, and I turned out to be
the only student there to--I wrote things that I refused to
entertain this, to put this in, and I argued that we just have
to keep this in that kind of position, and they actually gave
me a failing mark.
The one of the notes that I remember was Gene Sperling
would fire you. You deserved to be, and one of the things we
also talked about is that Social Security is then the stability
of that.
I believe that it is actually very stable as well, too.
People--and it also was clear that some kind of actuarial kinds
of adjustments or other kind of minor changes could really
extend liquidity for decades. Is that accurate?
Mr. O'Malley. Yes, sir, it is. I mean, it has been a
remarkably simple program in one sense. I don't----
Senator Fetterman. This is like this whole kind of, you
know, the sky is falling that it is bankrupt or any kinds of
things like that----
Mr. O'Malley. Not going bankrupt. At worst, if Congress
were unable to act as you had in 1982, there would be a big
depletion event, but it is not going bankrupt. As long as
Americans work, it will not go bankrupt.
Senator Fetterman. Yes, and I agree. It would just mean,
you know, it is so critical to millions and millions of
Americans, and it just would be just some small kind of
adjustments like that, and then that would stack decades and
decades of stability and financial security on this.
Mr. O'Malley. Yes. As does a better performing economy and
more job creation and rising wages.
Senator Fetterman. Yes. That is where we are at. I find it
strange, it almost makes me giggle that, you know, we had
members of the other side were more concerned about time calls,
but now that their nominee is--discussing about cutting Social
Security and things. Now, you wouldn't think that that would be
advisable to want to cut that or to explore that kind of a
conversation? I wouldn't think so.
Mr. O'Malley. In my travels through these halls, I haven't
met one member that wanted to cut Social Security, and I have
met members of both parties that were surprised that we already
have cut in terms of customer service. I think that was
unwitting. I haven't talked to a single member that said they
believe we should cut Social Security.
Senator Fetterman. Yes, I agree. I am just like you. All
across Pennsylvania, I have never run into a senior or a
recipient saying, you know what, we are getting too much, and
we really need to think about, you know, we could cut back and
tighten our belt.
I just want to acknowledge this as well too, that I would
hope that in a bipartisan level that we want to protect that
and strengthen it and address it and not turn it into a
political football, and just address it in ways--and making
those kinds of relatively minor kinds of changes to allow
Social Security to be secured and fully funded for decades and
decades down.
Even my, one of my professor, Alan Simpson, my Republican--
a Republican from Wyoming, you know, mentioned the same thing,
that it is going to be--it is often difficult to address that
because it is utilized more of as a political football, and is
that the same statement too? Would you agree with----
Mr. O'Malley. Was smiling only because I remember Alan
Simpson and he always makes me smile.
Senator Fetterman. Love that guy.
Mr. O'Malley. The challenges that face Social Security in
terms of a longer term solvency are things that this Congress
certainly has the ability to address. The good news is that
this program has the support of 80 percent of the American
people in a time of pretty polarized politics. That is an
enormous consensus for extending it.
Senator Fetterman. I, you know, if 80 percent of Americans
support that, I am willing to bet that it is 99.999 percent of
people that are recipients that support this program as well
too, and millions depend on that. Again, thank you, and thank
you.
Mr. O'Malley. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Braun. We have had a lot of talk about what to do
with Social Security. I think you made a clear statement. No
one wants to, cut benefits. Let's go to the other end to make
it solvent.
What do you do--talk about the impact, how much would we
need to keep it solvent for as far out as you can see, because
it does actuarially go broke here before we know it. It is
2034, I think. Is that----
Mr. O'Malley. Yes, sir.
Senator Braun. Yes, so what--be specific on what it is
going to take to make it solvent.
Mr. O'Malley. When I said, yes, sir, let me be very clear.
It is not projected to go broke. It is not every----
Senator Braun. When you have to cut benefits, and I guess
you said 23 percent when that occurs.
Mr. O'Malley. Yes, sir.
Senator Braun. To avoid that----
Mr. O'Malley. To avoid the 20 to 23 percent cut which is
currently scheduled in 2034, Congress would need to make some
changes in order to extend it.
Senator Braun. Would you be specific on what that would be
so we can hear it? I am sure you are going to know the numbers.
You should.
Mr. O'Malley. Yes, sir. The President has proposed having
people once they make $400,000, pay again into Social Security.
Senator Braun. What percentage would that be if that group
started paying? What would they have to pay into it? What
percentage of that income would it be to get it solvent?
Mr. O'Malley. Senator, I came here mostly prepared to talk
about the customer service things, so.
Senator Braun. Well, you can get back to me on that or any
other tool in addition to just paying more into the system.
Mr. O'Malley. Sure. I tell you, one of your colleagues,
Senator Cassidy from Louisiana, talks about different dials on
the actuarial stuff. I am certainly willing to dive deep and go
into that with any member that wants to.
The person better able to do that is our actuary, Steve
Goss, and but anyway, back to the call of your question, on
those various dials, you know, members of this body have been
putting forward bills.
Some people suggest that you should count not only the
earned income, but you should also count investment income as
part of that. Some have proposed that people should start
paying into Social Security, not just when they hit $400,000 on
the year, but $250,000 on the year.
Those are the policy decisions, or Senator Cassidy, your
colleague from Louisiana, says those are the dials that can be
considered. Here is something I learned that I did not know
before when I asked about the depletion event last time.
I said, what did they get wrong? How is it that Tip
O'Neill, Ronald Reagan, Howard Baker, and all these smart
people and the actuaries thought that they were creating 75
years of adequate funding, even accounting for the baby
boomers. I said, did he not know that the people my age had
been born?
He said, no, we knew all of that. That was calculated.
There were two things we missed. Steve Goss told me they missed
the duration and the depth of the recession. They probably
should have calculated in a longer recession.
The other thing they missed was the changes to the tax code
that happened after their bipartisan fix in 1982, which, by the
way, only happened about a month before the completion event
because human beings work against deadlines, I suppose.
He said what they didn't calculate was the changes to the
tax code would move a lot of the earned income out of that
bracket that they were asked to set, and they were asked to set
it at 90 percent.
Ninety percent of income in America, you pay your Social
Security FICA on. They set it at that in 1982, but over the
course of time, it shrank to just 82 percent because of the
concentration of wealth among the highest three or four percent
of earners took it out of that, so those are the two reasons
why it was moved up from 2050 to 2034, but it can be moved out
again.
Senator Braun. Raising revenue in a variety of ways that
might be done, what about the concept of means testing? Do you
have an opinion on that?
Mr. O'Malley. I think one of the beauties of Social
Security is that everybody that pays in receives a benefit. I
would like to do a double pump on this because I am no longer
running for office. I will never run for office again, so these
policy calls are not my calls. They are yours.
Senator Braun. Let's go to another one that is probably is
inherent in almost any Federal program. I have weighed in the
loudest on Medicare, $60 billion a year in fraud in a program
that is as dear as what Social Security would be.
Last year alone, I think it was $2.7 billion on urinary
catheters. I can't imagine how there could be that much fraud
on one item, but that is part of $60 billion. What is the
figure of fraud that would be part of Social Security?
Beyond fraud, how--what percentage would there be there of
payments made to the wrong beneficiary for the wrong amount?
Tell us a little bit about that.
Mr. O'Malley. Yes, sir. There was a front-page article in
the New York Times, in fact, just last weekend about fraud and
about people hacking into our system, using false identities,
in essence, taking over your, My SSA----
Senator Braun. Is there a number out there that----
Mr. O'Malley. Yes, the number in this article, based on a
GAO report, said it was approximately $34 million, I believe
over the last three years and----
Senator Braun. $34 million?
Mr. O'Malley. $34 million by this particular type of fraud.
The larger number, there have been some GAO reports I don't
have in front of me that looks at fraud across the board of
agencies, but in this particular instance of people hacking and
using fake identities and diverting payments, it was $34
million over the last three years, and we believe that we
stopped $23 million of that.
Of the eight meetings we have in regular rotation for
SecurityStat, one of them, Senator, exclusively focused on
fraud, upping our game, getting inside the turning radius of
the bad guys and the fraudsters.
I am glad to be able to report to you that seated at that
table--and by the way, it is the only one we close to the
public for obvious reasons. Seated at that table is our
independent Office of Inspector General, because her feedback,
without diminishing her independence, is really important to
us.
To that catheter case, when I read that one about, in the
Medicare context, I thought to myself was nobody mapping this?
We are greatly dialing up our geospatial, our ability to
recognize anomalies on the map----
Senator Braun. We would like your office to get back to
kind of categorize to the best of your ability to do it, how
much fraud would be a part of Social Security. It was an
alarming amount in terms of what it was for Medicare.
Several of us are weighing in on that, and that is arguably
a benefit that could be fixed in many other ways, like trying
to reform health care by making it more competitive. I see ways
that you can do it where you are not up against the actuarial
table like you are with Social Security.
We hear about fraud in so many different ways, just like
when we did the extended unemployment benefits. Somehow, you
have reports of $50 billion to $150 billion being swiped in a
special program.
We can't take the hit here when we are running now $2
trillion deficits, and Social Security is the biggest program
we got out there.
Mr. O'Malley. Yes, sir. I will be glad to get back to you
with an overview. I was flipping through my folder here to the
last fraud STAT, but I will be glad to get back to you with the
kind of----
Senator Braun. If you would.
Mr. O'Malley.--a high level view of what the most common
types of fraud is and the amount that we believe we are losing
because of it.
Senator Braun. I ran a business for 37 years, and if we
ever had any kind of irregularities that would have been in the
category of what you hear here----
Mr. O'Malley. Of the catheter----
Senator Braun. I mean--somebody gets fired. You know, you
either fix it immediately, but mostly there would have been
some type of awareness that you couldn't do it in the first
place, and if it does get to be part and parcel of a company,
you know, they pay the price big time, and not to mention there
might be liability involved to boot. Here was something that
struck me. It was on e-signatures, which is an efficiency tool.
You can do it almost in anything. It was part of a Biden
directive shortly after he got elected, which would have been
in 1921.
Chairman Casey and I had to write a letter to the Social
Security Administration. We did that back on December 13th, and
ironically, we did hear today from the Social Security
Administration----
Mr. O'Malley. It wasn't ironic. It was causal.
Senator Braun. Okay. Stuff like that, that is low hanging
fruit. I imagine being a Governor, I know for me, coming from
the real world of running a business, some of this stuff is
just astounding that it can happen.
Your general opinion, why aren't we being alert to stuff
that would get caught in a split second in other places, State
Governments, the private sector? How can we be in a place where
like for Medicare, for instance, you can have a figure of $60
billion in fraud.
I know billions are now kind of chump change, but that is
still a big figure.
Mr. O'Malley. It is a huge figure. Let me say on the
letter, I apologize for the amount of time that it took to get
back to you on eSignature. Social Security has been a bit
behind in joining the world where eSignatures are, you know, a
common way of doing business. We are making some substantial
progress. The initial letters and drafts I saw back to you, I
didn't think we are sufficiently responsive to the question.
Senator Braun. I think that is a good way to put it.
Mr. O'Malley. I made them dig deeper, and it is a much
better--I think you see in there and with the pie chart, and I
was just on the phone with the IRS Commissioner or texting him
earlier today about a remaining item that we need his help on
in order to allow us to do attestations rather than signatures.
We have been doing more eSignature, and we are making
progress on that. Also removing requirements that just no
longer make any sense for actual signatures when we can do that
stuff over the phone. I think this is the thing that most
people miss when it comes to waste, fraud, and abuse.
I remember after the attacks of 9/11, I was talking to a
national security professional and about how we miss things. He
said, you know, Governor--I am sorry, Mayor. He said, you know,
Mayor, if we only knew what we already knew and did something
about it.
When I was Mayor, we started doing something that hadn't
been done before. We asked, can you show me all of the top
earners of overtime and all of the top users of sick time, and
could you rank them from greatest to least? I mean, we couldn't
do that in public. They are individual people.
They said, you want what? I said, I want you to rank--I
mean, things like that that have never been done. Or on
ambulance runs. What are the addresses that we go to time and
time again?
Senator Braun. That is just common sense. You are really
forced to do that as a Mayor, because if you are letting stuff
like that go, people will run you down at a ballgame or some
other place. You are going to be held accountable here--I am
worried about the fact that we have lost that.
In one other--Chairman Casey is going to be back shortly.
We are going to take a short recess. We may still do that until
11.30 a.m., but WEP GPO. That is a--to fix it, it is about an
$18 billion a year fix, $180 billion over 10 years. That has
got an inherent unfairness to it in a way that has kind of come
down.
Sadly, we are in a position where that would be difficult
to fix due to the fact we are borrowing a couple trillion
dollars each year, but the overpayment part of it. If there is
one thing that I try to get to the bottom of right away, it
would be to fix that.
You mentioned it earlier, I think, in your opening
statement, and I would rather than just give a pass on that,
because they are already dealing with the unfairness of not
feeling that they are getting benefits that are equal to what
others are, is what can we do to prevent the overpayments in
the first place rather than forgiving them once they occur, or
either trying to clawing them back which is insult on top of
injury.
Mr. O'Malley. Right. We have done a lot of unpacking of
this to figure out what the leading causes are, both in Title
16, SSI, where the leading causes are financial accounts,
wages, and in-kind support, and maintenance.
In Title 2, the retirees and disabled, relationship and
dependency was the leading cause and substantial gainful
activity, in the other words earning above that is another one,
and computations, I suppose, is the larger bucket where the WEP
calculations would fall.
The reasons we discover these things have to do with the
annual earnings adjustments, and frankly, not to sound like a
broken record, when you have fewer staff, sadly, it takes us
longer to catch up with the overpayments and do the notices and
address them than it might have before, so that is a part of
this. We just put forward regs not exactly related to WEP, but
we did put forward regs on the payroll information exchange,
so, our ability with a large national company like Equifax to
be able--and a data solution to immediately be able to identify
a person's earnings--so hopefully that will mitigate some of
these overpayment problems.
Senator Braun. I think that would be an important one, and
then the probably the most basic thing for anybody that is
offering a service of some sort. I know in our business, if a
phone call went over a minute, we felt that was a phone call
maybe lost to a competitor.
Since there is not competition in this case, if you got the
cost up to I think you said 1.2 percent, you know, from where
it is currently, what would that do in terms of fixing hold
time? Because that is probably the most symbolic feature of
dysfunctional Government is when you are having to burn a half
an hour to just have a phone conversation.
Mr. O'Malley. Yes, sir. With the President's budget of
$15.4 billion, we believe that we can reduce our 800 number
wait time by 20 minutes.
I believe that we could get it down even further. In fact,
in the little four pager I have provided with, we believe that
if we were able to operate again like we always had before
2018, at 1.2 percent overhead, we could get that down to five
minutes.
In the field offices, it is three to five minutes, if you
can find the field office or your nearest field office phone.
From the 800 number, if we were up able to operate on 1.2
percent, we believe we could get that wait time down to five
minutes.
Senator Braun. In the real world, that standard would be
whenever you are over a minute, the call goes somewhere else.
In our case, it would be to a competitor where you pay that
ultimate price.
That is why you figure out how not to let that happen.
Government, you know, where it has gone to. It has got to get
back down into where people for basic questions in any
government agency don't have to hang on to the phone more than
a few minutes at the most.
Mr. O'Malley. Yes, sir. It is a trust. I mean, our
expectations, our consumer expectations also apply to our
government. If we can't do the basics of answering the phone,
it is hard for people to trust us on larger things like their
retirement or the solvency effects that you all have to do in a
bipartisan way.
I would like to believe that as we fix the very immediately
unfixable customer service crisis, that that will put some more
oxygen of trust in the room for you men and women when it comes
to the longer term solvency----
Senator Braun. Since we are blessed with a lot of time and
we are almost to the point where we are we are going to recess
anyway, I am going to venture on to a different subject.
Mayor, Governor, you know how it works in jobs like that.
Currently, our biggest issue is not just Social Security, it is
Medicare, it is Medicaid. It is the fact that we are borrowing
$0.30 on every dollar that we spend currently.
We have never in the history of the country raised more
than roughly 18 percent of our GDP in Federal revenues. High
tax rates, you flush a little more into the Treasury, economic
growth goes down a little bit. Cut taxes, you take a little bit
away from the Treasury, economic growth goes up.
Given the fact that we have got 50 years of data that this
place can't pay for more than 18 percent of itself, of the GDP,
and we are currently at 25 percent, what kind of confidence
does that give you that the entirety of it, with Social
Security at the centerpiece, is going to be there for future
generations?
Mr. O'Malley. Well, the good news about Social Security is
it doesn't contribute to the deficit, so that is why, you know,
the ability to close this yawning gap between the declining
staff and the rising beneficiaries, the dollars are already
there to do it and it doesn't contribute to the deficit. People
have already paid it in their FICA. Some of those----
Senator Braun. Would, though at some point, if you were at
the point of cutting benefits or borrowing money or having to
do it through the general fund. Would you agree with that?
Mr. O'Malley. Well, that is true, and it would also be true
that I would imagine, any fix to the WEP would require the
infusion of general funds, but the good news on answering the
phone calls and getting people's disability determinations done
before they die, that we could do with 1.2 percent, and it
won't add to the deficit.
Senator Braun. You would think. I would call that low
hanging fruit.
Mr. O'Malley. Yes, sir. We need your help picking that
fruit.
Senator Braun. Well, I think we will have a short recess
until the chairman gets back. OK. Give you a breather.
Mr. O'Malley. Thank you. Senator.
The Chairman. Well, I am sorry for the delay. We had to go
to a briefing and now we are back. I know that Ranking Member
Braun just finished, I guess, a couple of minutes ago.
Commissioner, I will be the last questioner, unless we have
someone else who might--we are good, okay. I wanted to go back
to an issue that you have made reference to, and I appreciate
your comments about this, the issue of overpayments.
In December, as I made reference to earlier, my staff in
Pennsylvania had 78 open cases with constituents who needed
help responding to SSA overpayment notice. I sent a letter with
Senators Wyden and Brown requesting information about
overpayments that were linked to COVID-19, checks, which as you
know, should be held harmless when calculating asset and income
limits.
I am grateful today for your announcement on the changes
you are planning to make to respond to overpayments. It is very
important that the burden is lifted off of beneficiaries. That
is a heavy burden, as you know.
At the same time, we should be working to prevent
overpayments in the future and as well as underpayments and to
ease the challenges facing both workers and beneficiaries. Here
is the question, how do you plan to communicate these policy
changes to both SSA employees, as well as to beneficiaries?
Mr. O'Malley. We will be doing so in a number of different
ways. I mean, first of all, thank you for holding this hearing.
As you know, it has been nine years since Social Security's
even had a budget or appropriations hearing.
Your attention to this issue, your concern for people all
across the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and these real life
stories is also communication. We will be doing a lot of calls
with managers.
In fact, I was on one yesterday with 3,075 managers as
LeeAnn Stuever was walking them through the research, the how's
and the why's, so they could understand how to implement these
new policies.
Sixty Minutes was in a way, as awful as that was for many
of us to watch, especially those of us in the agency--that was
communications. I mean, we might be accurate 98 percent of the
time, but in an agency this large, when you are wrong in two
percent of the time, that can create a lot of damage,
especially if you are one of those people that maybe didn't see
the notice, accidentally threw it out in the mail, maybe
thought it was a scam.
We are going to be doing four things right away, and we are
going to look to do others. One of them is we are no longer
going to do that brutal sort of 100 percent claw back of
beneficiaries' benefits. Second, we are going to shift the
burden of proof. If the agency has reason to believe the
claimant was at fault, we should put forward that proof and not
ask the claimant to do it.
The third, we are going to allow repayment plans, as the VA
does, and sometimes they make mistakes too, of 60-month period
of time rather than the 36 which we had then. Finally, we are
going to make it easier for overpaid beneficiaries to request a
waiver of that payment, because the Social Security
Administration, you have empowered it, Congress has empowered
it, to be able to waive certain payments if they defeat the
purpose of the Act.
Namely, if it puts an elderly person out of their home that
would certainly defeat the purpose of the Act, or if it is
contrary to equity and good conscience.
We look forward to putting forward other guidance to the
field in order to allow these decisions to be made in a much
more immediate, human, compassionate, face to face interaction
in the field, rather than allowing it to linger for months and
months until we catch up with that.
Let's also be very clear that part of the reason for the
growing -- this is interesting, in the research and the
unpacking that we did, we have not seen greater numbers of
people affected by overpayments, but we have seen the amount of
those overpayments go up as our staffing has declined, which
kind of makes sense.
If it takes us longer to catch it, that is going to be more
months that tick up, which creates an even greater hardship for
somebody that is living on their monthly benefit one month to
the next.
The Chairman. Just in terms of a beneficiary, how will
they--how and when will they receive information about these
new--these changes?
Mr. O'Malley. We are going to be changing our notices. Our
notices across the board are hard to understand. They are not
exactly plain language. It is like Mad Libs designed by mad
lawyers.
I mean there is all sorts of language that is hard to
track. That is the most important thing we can do is the
clarity of the language in the notice to people and that is the
primary means. I found it interesting that 92 percent of people
actually go to the trouble to sit on hold for 39 minutes in
order to repay and work out a payment plan.
I have listened on the other side of some of those calls
when people say, look, I told you I would do $200 a month, I
can only afford $100. Our people have the ability to make those
adjustments, but the notices is probably going to be the
primary way that we improve communication to people.
The Chairman. They would see that when?
Mr. O'Malley. The new notices, if memory serves me
correctly, within the--we need a couple of months in order to
effectuate the change to the notices. However, in the meantime
we are doing a kind of a manual work around for notices
especially in those instances where it has defaulted because of
a lack of response to that 100 percent intercept.
We are taking those out and tending to them manually. We
are also doing something else. This ordeal has allowed us to be
able to better analyze and parse this data, to focus on those
incidences also where there are huge amounts owed by a very
tiny number of people, that we can also address.
Now, some of those, if it involved fraud, we are not going
to address, but those that were no fault, we will and do so
more quickly.
The Chairman. Is there any way to expedite that from a few
months?
Mr. O'Malley. You should have heard what they initially
told me.
The Chairman. Oh, okay.
Mr. O'Malley. We are expediting.
The Chairman. A few months is----
Mr. O'Malley. Yes. There is the training and there are
changes that have to happen in the 1,210 field offices for some
of this. There are also the processing centers.
There are also the separate sort of debt management people.
The notices are difficult given the legacy systems, but they
are moving fast, and the manual workaround that we are going to
do immediately was because of that delay.
I was not going to wait and have seniors suffer hardship,
and not to mention all of the anxiety and the other emotional
trauma while we untangle our notice issues, so those are going
to be done immediately and through a manual workaround.
The Chairman. I wanted to move to another issue relating to
communications. It is challenges within the agency. There is,
and none of this is new to you, but there is often confusion
and inconsistency when it comes to eligibility service and
delivery rules among both beneficiaries and employees.
Ranking Member Braun and I sent a letter to you in December
regarding the acceptance of e-signatures, and we appreciate
your response for that. E-signatures should be accepted on most
documents, but I have heard from legal advocates that SSA
frequently rejects e-signatures and requests physical
signatures, which is an unnecessary hurdle for many
beneficiaries that may prevent them from accessing benefits.
I know that updating procedures and manuals and retraining
SSA staff who interact with beneficiaries is time consuming, as
you just made reference to in terms of trying to expedite
things, but keeping funding and the resulting staffing
challenges in mind, I want to discuss some of the ways you plan
to improve communications between employees and beneficiaries.
How would you address the need for ongoing training to
ensure accurate information is being delivered to
beneficiaries? Just on the training question.
Mr. O'Malley. Yes, sir. As I have traveled all around the
country, I shared with you earlier and let me apologize for the
length of time it took to get back to you on the eSignature.
The initial drafts I saw were not responsive, at least to
what I would consider to be responsive, so I insisted that we
get back to you in a more substantive way. I hope through that
pie chart, you see, we have made substantial progress.
More is imminent, and then there are some of those red
parts of it that--you know, part of this is not only allowing
electronic signature, part of it is realizing those places
where we don't need a signature at all, and it can be done with
attestation over the phone, but let me go to training.
As I did employee town halls all across the country,
Senator, when I was in San Francisco, you would have thought
somebody put a banner outside that said SSA town hall about our
poor training. Our training really took a hit when we went
remote in the recession and the agency has not recovered from
that trauma.
There was a time when we did training really well and it
was also at the same time that we had the top morale, and there
was an esprit de corps. People, young people coming in,
learning complex jobs like benefits administrator, had people
on the floor, next to them, present, there at the office that
they could turn to, as any of us have.
I certainly did as a young lawyer in my profession. Good to
turn to older lawyers and ask them how to do this, so, a lot of
that fell by the wayside.
Then with the rising beneficiaries and the declining staff,
many of the most experienced people were told, well, that
training stuff is all great, but there is all these people in
waiting lines outside the door. We got to handle these people.
We cannibalized our own training in order to throw it at
the customer service crisis and the larger and ever rising
numbers of customers. One of the lessons I believe we have
learned from last year's hiring that we were able to do thanks
to the better budget that you supported, we hired a lot of
people, but we lost a lot of them in the first year, and if we
are able to start to hire again--keep in mind, right now, we
are in a freeze, a general hiring freeze. If you should be able
to pass the President's budget, which would be a huge step in
the right direction, we absolutely have to dedicate those
trainers to training and not cave in to the temptation to pull
them off of that training to throw them at the incoming
customers through the door.
This agency does workforce optimization like all the time.
You and I would call it whack a mole. We are always shifting
people from one thing to another to deal with the latest spike
in the latest backlog and the urgent problem. We need to have
dedicated trainers, and their job is to train.
They are the best at it. We have to be patient enough to
realize that after that six months with that cohort of 30 new
hires, those 30 are going to more than make up for the
productivity so-called lost by having the trainer not in the
front window.
The Chairman. Ultimately it does--it is an outgrowth of the
funding and resource issues.
Mr. O'Malley. For so many of these things, the greater
amount of those overpayments ultimately a root cause is, yes,
antiquated technology. Also, a lack of staffing, and the same
thing with the training.
We cannibalize. We have been where we are trying to serve
more people than have ever been coming through our doors or our
phones with fewer staff than we have had in 27 years. For all
of the clever tricks and process improvements and those things,
you know, those are singles.
Only Congress can hit the home run of restoring us to 1.2
percent funding again, like we had every year before 2018.
The Chairman. You know, you made reference earlier to
technology. We all have stories about Government agencies at
all levels that that didn't have the technology they needed to
tackle big problems.
It is alarming for a lot of Americans to hear about the--
how antiquated the technology is in so many agencies, including
SSA.
Tell me about that challenge and what you think you can do
about it with existing resources or not, but what you hope to
be able to do with more resources, just on technology alone.
Mr. O'Malley. Yes, sir. It is amazing how much data the
Social Security Administration has collected on all of us from
our very first paycheck. It is phenomenal. It is also
phenomenal that it continues to operate, even though the core
and the base of it is very ancient COBOL, green screen, IBM
technology.
It is a bit like the layers of Jerusalem built upon each
and there are a lot of clever people in the field that have
some background in coding and product, the technology term of
that word product, and they have built some clever things.
In Birmingham, there was a tool that was developed locally
there that takes the average processing time for a Medicare
only application that would take a technician usually eight
minutes to do, and they automated that on an Excel spreadsheet,
and they are able to do it in seven seconds.
You multiply that out over a big agency, 40 work years
saved and that sort of thing. When it comes to going through
now really voluminous medical records and what we call Section
F, the part of the disability case folder, we have developed a
tool called IMAGEN.
IMAGEN allows the technician--or rather the person making
the disability determination, it alerts them to what page of
those thousand pages the real meat of listing is, or the
doctor's evaluation is. It is even able to compare it to past
cases to say this one has 80 percent likelihood of being
allowed compared to past cases.
There is some really--the innovation is happening. Most, a
lot of it happens out in the field. When it comes to the larger
things, we have got to get out of this straitjacket that out of
our technology budget, 90 percent of it goes to maintenance of
those ancient systems, and only 10 percent goes to developing
new systems, or what you and I would call modernization.
Other agencies, particularly the VA, I think the VA has
three times our technology budget, even though we serve I do
believe more veterans than the VA does. It is people, it is
process, it is technology, and we have been short staffed on
all of those, or short funded on all of those.
I misspoke earlier when I was talking about our comparison
to other, insurance agencies looking at our budget as a
percentage of outlays. AllState was actually 19.4 percent as
their overhead to benefits. Liberty Mutual is 22.8 percent--I
am sorry, 23.6 percent. Social Security traditionally had been
1.2. We are below 1.
Without increasing the deficit, if we were allowed to
operate again at 1.2 percent, we could bring customer service
back, and the good news is, people have already paid for it.
The Chairman. I wanted to move for my last question with,
this Committee historically has focused on frauds and scams,
and issues an annual report to educate folks around the country
about the newest scam and the newest iteration of that
fraudulent behavior.
I think it is one of the best things this Committee does
every year to be able to update that, and every time you think
you have learned everything about what the bad guys are doing,
they invent some other scheme. We know that older adults are at
particular risk for Social Security scam. Identity theft is an
issue.
Of course, it affects everyone in the country. Recently, my
office engaged with the mother from Delaware County,
Pennsylvania, as you know, right near Philadelphia, whose
infant daughter Social Security card was lost in the mail.
This family now regularly--maybe I should say that this
mother now regularly monitors her daughter's credit card--her
credit, I should say, to ensure that no one is using her social
security number.
I have co-sponsored the Social Security Child Protection
Act, which would require SSA to issue new Social Security
numbers to children under the age of 14 if their cards were
lost or stolen.
How is SSA supporting individuals whose cards have been
stolen? And what other steps is the agency taking to prevent
identity theft?
Mr. O'Malley. Senator, identity theft is one of the leading
causes of fraud, as you know, when it comes to people stealing
Social Security benefits. There was an article in the New York
Times that happened just last week.
The challenge in all fraud cases is staying inside the
turning radius of the bad guys. They are always changing. They
are always adjusting. They are always coming up with new
tactics and strategies.
We need to become more nimble than the bad guys, and that
is what we are endeavoring to do at Social Security. The
challenge we face as a customer facing agency is that we want
people to be able to access their benefits. We want them to be
able to go online, but we also need to make sure that their
identity is confirmed and that they are the people going
online.
NIST, I understand has recommendations for standards that
every agency needs to make, and yet every agency is making
those tradeoffs about making sure that it is good for the
consumer and that it can be used as indeed banks do. The banks
are probably better and more nimble than we are at this point.
We need to learn from them and that is why every two weeks
in FraudStat, we lock the door. It is the only one that is not
public and with the OIG people there at the table with us, we
look at all sorts of methods and tactics and strategies, and
ask ourselves, are we doing any better than we were before at
detecting and preventing this?
I have heard it said that there are huge numbers of Social
Security numbers that are available on the, you know, on the
black market.
The agency has been very loathe to issue new Social
Security cards, but I certainly would look forward to working
with you, especially where children are concerned, because I am
not sure that the rationale of somehow messing up your earnings
by giving a 6-year old a new card are really in play here.
The Chairman. I appreciate that. Commissioner, I know we
are tight on time, and I know you have all been patient and you
have been patient with our fluctuating schedules. We are
grateful for that. I will just make some closing comments and
we will wrap up.
As we heard from the Commissioner today, the services
provided by the Social Security Administration touch the lives
of every single American. Social security is the most
successful anti-poverty program to date.
The benefits from this program allow tens of millions of
Americans, including older adults, people with disabilities,
and children, to live with dignity. We should be protecting and
strengthening Social Security for those receiving benefits
today and for future generations, and we should not be talking
about cuts, as so many around here seem to talk about year
after year.
I am introducing the Boosting Benefits and COLAs for
Seniors Act so adults can receive the benefit increases that
they need.
Apart from strengthening benefits, the Social Security
Administration needs additional funding, I think that is an
understatement, to support agency operations.
This is absolutely critical. The Social Security
Administration has been starved of resources, negatively
impacting both employee morale, as well as customer service.
So, you can, as a politician, gripe about customer service
but don't support the funding for Social Security. Can't blow
hot air about what Government is not doing and then not support
the funding.
When you do that, you lack integrity. You are throwing sand
in the eyes of the people. You are trying to confuse them. If
you want the service to be better, you got to support the
funding. I say that to my fellow Senators, all 99.
For years, this Administration, the Social Security
Administration, has lacked the leadership necessary to keep the
agency on track and accountable to the promises that we have
made and the basic promise we have made to the American people.
I think Commissioner O'Malley has been a breath of fresh
air, with his leadership, his experience, and his determination
to make change. I was glad to hear that Commissioner O'Malley
has been visiting dedicated workers in field offices across the
country, engaging with both unions and advocates.
His hands on, all in approach is something we didn't have
in the previous Administration. That is also an understatement.
I won't elaborate. We must ensure that SSA workers are
supported so they can provide the high quality service
Americans deserve.
I look forward to working with Commissioner O'Malley on a
whole host of fronts, but in particular to reduce wait times,
to improve customer service, and address overpayments. Ranking
Member Braun will submit closing remarks for the record.
I want to thank Commissioner O'Malley for his time today
and for his public service, his willing to step up and serve
again after serving so--in such a distinguished fashion in his
previous roles in public service.
For the record, if any Senators have additional questions
for Commissioner O'Malley or statements to be added, the
hearing record will be open until Wednesday, March 27th. Thank
you all for participating. We are adjourned.

Closing Statement of Senator Mike Braun, Ranking Member
Thank you, Chairman Casey. Thank you Commissioner O'Malley
for your transparency and commitment to improving customer
service.
Social Security is a vital program for all Americans. We
need to be good stewards of its services and benefits.
We should focus on balanced budgets and a system that works
for taxpayers and beneficiaries, not one that works for rigid
bureaucracy.
I hope we can build on some of the early improvements at
the agency and prioritize innovation.
The only way out of the customer service crisis is
effective organization, increased productivity, and
modernization.
Thank you. I yield back.
=======================================================================
APPENDIX
=======================================================================
Prepared Witness Statements
=======================================================================
U.S. Senate Special Committee on Aging
"Keeping our Promise to Older Adults and People with Disabilities: The
Status of Social Security Today"
March 20, 2024
Prepared Witness Statement
Commissioner Martin O'Malley
Thank you for inviting me to discuss the Social Security
Administration's (SSA's) service delivery, customer experience,
and Fiscal Year (FY) 2025 Budget request. I am Martin O'Malley,
Commissioner of SSA, and I am deeply honored to be here today
on behalf of the agency's thousands of skilled and dedicated
employees.
Social Security is the most far-reaching and important act
of social and economic justice that the people of the United
States have ever enacted, and it is the honor of a lifetime to
answer the call to public service once more by leading SSA
towards a better future. In particular, I pledged to make
improving SSA's customer service my top priority. I was sworn
in as Commissioner exactly three months ago today.
It is my strong belief that the public deserves the highest
level of customer service from their government. We owe it to
every American to improve the customer service and support
provided by Social Security, so people can get answers to their
questions and get their benefit applications decided in a
timely manner. These are your constituents, your neighbors,
your friends, and your family. They have paid into the Social
Security system, and that includes paying for adequate customer
service from the agency.
THE CURRENT STATE
Social Security Is Serving More Customers Than Ever Before with
Fewer Staff Than Ever Before
By the end of FY 2024, SSA will serve over seven million
more beneficiaries with about 7,000 fewer full-time permanent
staff when compared to FY 2015 (Figure 1). While modernization
and other efficiencies have helped for some things, there is no
way around the fact that the agency cannot keep doing more with
less.
SSA's budget was essentially level from FY 2018 through FY
2021, while costs continued to increase. We had to make
difficult decisions to cut funding in certain areas, such as
staffing and overtime. As a result, we ended FY 2022 with our
lowest staffing level in 25 years.
Figure 1. Staffing Declined as Beneficiaries Increased

With your support, we received a $785 million increase in
FY 2023 over FY 2022. We used that funding to begin to rebuild
our workforce to better serve our customers and beneficiaries.
Our staffing increased to nearly 60,000 at the end of FY 2023 -
still historically low, but better than the roughly 56,000 at
the end of the prior year.
Currently - due to the extended continuing resolution (CR)
that we are under in FY 2024 - we have stopped all hiring, and
our staffing levels have already fallen below where they were
in April of last year. If we continue this path of no hiring,
we will fall to a new all-time low of around 55,000 full-time
permanent staff by the end of this fiscal year - nearly 11
percent lower than the roughly 62,000 full-time permanent staff
we averaged from 2010 through 2019.
Similarly, the State Disability Determination Services
(DDS) were able to make some progress increasing their staffing
levels in FY 2023, following years of record- high attrition
and a historically low staffing level in FY 2022, but in FY
2024, the DDS have quickly dropped below last year's staffing
levels due to our pause in hiring given the funding level,
which is leading to a severe setback in addressing a service
delivery crisis.
SSA Has Extremely Low Operating Expenses
Members may be surprised to learn that Social Security has
now been reduced to operate on less than one percent of its
annual benefit payments. This is extremely low - much lower
than private insurance companies. For instance, Allstate
operates on 19 percent of its annual benefit payments, and
Liberty Mutual operates on nearly 24 percent of its annual
benefit payments.
Please know that I am not suggesting that this was
something done knowingly and willingly to Social Security by
Members of Congress. However, Congress has not granted Social
Security its own budget or appropriations hearing in nine
years.
We can and must do better. We want to work with Congress to
sustain the funding increases in the President's FY 2025 budget
and beyond, to enable SSA to improve service levels and reduce
wait times.
Under the current system, Social Security's operating
overhead, as a share of benefit outlays, has shrunk by 20
percent over the last ten years. A decade ago in FY 2015,
Congress provided a funding level that represented 1.26 percent
of benefit outlays for operating expenses (Figure 2), but the
proportion has been shrinking over time, as our appropriated
administrative expenses have not kept pace with the growth in
our beneficiaries and benefit outlays. In FY 2023, it was down
to 1.01 percent, and under a full-year CR for FY 2024, it will
drop under 1.0 percent for the first time ever, to just 0.94
percent.
Figure 2. SSA's Limitation on Administrative Expenses (LAE) As
a Percent of Benefit Outlays

Our Service and Customers are Suffering
As a result of this historic underfunding and
understaffing, Social Security faces a service delivery crisis.
The situation is dire, and the public we serve is paying the
price as they attempt to access the benefits that they have
already worked their whole lives to earn. For example:
Backlogs in the states continue to grow. Disability
applicants are waiting on average nearly eight months (228
days) for an initial decision and an additional seven months
(223 days) for those who request a reconsideration. However,
for those applicants with the most severe health conditions, we
award benefits in less than 30 days.
People who try to reach us by phone are now waiting
on hold for 38 minutes or more on a dysfunctional 800 Number
system.
Our agency has long strived to get the right amount
to the right person at the right time, but struggles to catch
erroneous overpayments in a timely manner, which can have
damaging consequences for beneficiaries.
Still, we do our very best every day to serve the highest
number of beneficiaries we have ever served in the face of the
lowest projected staffing levels in 27 years.
HOW WE'RE ADDRESSING THE SERVICE DELIVERY CRISIS
As soon as I was sworn in three months ago, I announced my
intent to focus the agency on three key service delivery
challenges in 2024: disability determination wait times,
National 800 Number wait times, and overpayment and
underpayment inequities.
Since then, I have held countless briefings with executives
and staff, met with labor partners and advocates, and most
importantly, I have traveled to SSA's regions across the
country to meet with and learn from the dedicated employees who
are tirelessly serving members of the public each day in our
offices and on our phones. I conducted 10 town halls in
headquarters and the regions where I was able to interact with
about 2,000 employees. I visited field offices, hearing
offices, processing centers, and teleservice centers. I sat in
with call center representatives taking calls and sat side by
side with claims specialists interacting with the public. I
heard countless suggestions for improvements both big and
small, some of which we are already beginning to implement. I
also made an open call for employees to submit their ideas and
insights for improving customer service, and so far, we have
received nearly 3,000 submissions and counting. I am grateful
to the dedicated SSA employees who took the time to submit
their ideas, and I have begun to personally review and respond
to as many as I can each week.
Based on what I have learned from inside and outside of the
agency, including conversations with employees and customers, I
have implemented numerous changes to improve both our
employees' experience and our customers' experience with us. I
like to call these quick wins or low-hanging fruit - that is,
things where we have the authority and the ability to act
quickly and make immediate improvements, no matter how
seemingly small.
For example:
During my visit, one employee in Boston identified
the need for a simple technology fix to create a "no to all"
button (similar to "select all") within the claims- taking
process on Supplemental Security Income (SSI) applications. By
doing so, we could reduce staff time in collecting information
on applicants' financial resources. We were able to implement
this fix within four weeks of first hearing the idea.
Also based on an employee suggestion - this one from
Birmingham - we rolled out a nationwide expansion of a new
Automated Medicare Process (AMP) to improve backend processing
for online Medicare claims. This will reduce processing time
from seven minutes to seven seconds, freeing up the equivalent
of around 40 people to do other critical pending work. In one
week, we implemented a fix that had been stalled since 2011.
To further increase our ability to collaborate,
engage, and innovate across the agency, I announced an increase
in on-site presence at SSA's headquarters and regional offices,
starting April 7. (SSA's field offices have been fully open to
the public since early 2022 and are not affected by this
change.)
Last month, we published formal notice of our plans
to access and use information from payroll data providers.\1\
This long-awaited automated payroll information exchange (PIE)
will reduce wage-related overpayments by ensuring we receive
timely and accurate wage data. The notice is open for public
comment until April 15, 2024, and we encourage all interested
parties to submit comments.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ SSA, "Use of Electronic Payroll Data To Improve Program
Administration." Federal Register, 89 FR 11773. February 15, 2024.
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2024/02/15/2024-02961/use-of-
electronic-payroll-data-to-improve-program-administration. See also:
SSA, "Social Security Publishes Proposed Rule for Payroll Information
Exchange to Reduce Improper Payments." February 15, 2024. https://
www.ssa.gov/news/press/releases/2024/#2-2024-2.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We are also working on three final rules that will
simplify and streamline the consideration of non-cash
assistance within the SSI program. By taking these actions, we
will increase the accessibility of this vital needs-based
assistance, while also decreasing overall processing time.
SecurityStat
On February 5, 2024, we launched SecurityStat, standing
biweekly leadership meetings to track and align on key
performance outcomes across rotating challenges. Many of you
have kindly sent your staff to observe this new way of doing
business at SSA. Your attention, your interest, and the
presence of your staff at our side have been more deeply
appreciated than you can know.
SecurityStat is based on the successes I had with CitiStat
and StateStat in my prior roles. I have found in my past
experience that a focus on data for all, combined with regular
accountability and collaboration, helps to create a winnable
game for employees and improve performance across the board,
especially in large agencies. That is precisely what
SecurityStat is about.
The four central tenets of SecurityStat are: timely,
accurate information shared by all; rapid deployment of
resources; effective tactics and strategies; and relentless
follow-up and assessment.
SecurityStat is critical because the service delivery
challenges that we face are cross-cutting. No one component of
SSA, no matter how well-led, can solve any one of these
problems by itself. Rather, we must work together across the
agency in timely, agile, and collaborative ways as never
before. SecurityStat provides a systematic and recurring method
of doing that, by gathering the top leaders in a room together
and engaging in data-driven performance management.
Every two weeks, in a rotating fashion, we gather together
and focus intensely on the most important things SSA is charged
with accomplishing for the American people and for you, their
Members of Congress. For one blessed hour every two weeks we
focus, together, on each of eight key challenges:
Field Operations
Human Resources
National 800 Number
Overpayments and Underpayments
Disability Determinations
Disability Hearings
Fraud
Notices
On an encouraging note, I have found that there is a
certain muscle memory at SSA. The senior executives and
frontline managers have responded very positively to this
newer, faster cadence of collaboration and accountability.
On the first Monday of the SecurityStat rotation, we begin
by focusing on field operations - the more than 1,200 field
offices, eight processing centers, and 24 teleservice centers
that make this agency go. We discuss ways to reduce the
attrition rates that plague the agency, currently 10 percent in
the field offices and 22 percent among the staff answering the
phones on the National 800 Number. We discuss ways to improve
performance and service delivery even in a reality where
customers keep increasing and staffing keeps declining. Then,
we focus on the flip side of service delivery - the human
resources of the skilled and trained employees necessary for us
to serve the American people even as we labor under a total
hiring freeze.
On Tuesday mornings in the first weekly rotation, we turn
first to Social Security's National 800 Number. Average wait
times for customers trying to reach us by phone have
skyrocketed to 38 minutes today, nearly double the FY 2019 wait
time of 20 minutes. Five to seven million people call our 800
Number every month, and about four million of them hang up in
disgust after waiting far too long. This year was the 35th
anniversary of our 800 Number, and it was a challenging one
thanks to a woefully underperforming phone system that has
fallen far short of our expectations. Under the current
technology, our managers have no visibility into the work being
done, and call-takers have no view into the customers who pop
up onto their screen. In addition to the technology short-
comings, we are struggling now with a 22 percent attrition rate
in our teleservice centers and among other staff answering the
phones. All options are on the table as we do everything in our
power to reduce unacceptably long wait times being endured by
our customers.
Overpayments and Underpayments
In the second topic of our first Tuesday rotation, we turn
to overpayments and underpayments. For 88 years, the hard-
working employees of the Social Security Administration have
strived to pay the right amount, to the right person, at the
right time, and the agency has done this with a high degree of
accuracy over a massive scale of beneficiaries; our overall
accuracy rates are 99.34 percent for Social Security and 90.80
percent for SSI based on our stewardship reviews.\2\ In fact,
one of the unsung stories of heroism in our nation's battle
against the COVID-19 pandemic was SSA's Herculean
accomplishment of cranking out those checks to protect
beneficiaries' income and healthcare during a critical time in
the pandemic.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See PaymentAccuracy.gov. These overall accuracy figures
consider both overpayments and underpayments for FY 2022, the most
recent data available.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Despite our best efforts, we sometimes get it wrong and pay
beneficiaries more than they are due, creating an overpayment.
When that happens, Congress requires that we make every
effort to recover those overpaid benefits, but doing so without
regard to the larger purpose of the program can result in grave
injustices to individuals, as we see from the stories of people
losing their homes or being put in dire financial straits when
they suddenly see their benefits cut off to recover a decades-
old overpayment, or disability beneficiaries attempting to work
and finding their efforts rewarded with large overpayments.
Innocent people can be badly hurt, and these injustices shock
our shared sense of equity and good conscience as Americans.
We are continually improving how we serve the millions of
people who depend on our programs, although we have room for
improvement, as media reports last fall revealed. We have also
embarked upon a deep dive into the extent of the overpayment
problem at Social Security, the root causes of these
administrative errors, and the steps we can take as an agency
to address these individual injustices.
Our deeper understanding of the complexities of this
problem has set us on the following course of action:
1. Starting next Monday, March 25, we will be ceasing
the heavy-handed practice of intercepting 100 percent of an
overpaid beneficiary's monthly Social Security benefit by
default if they fail to respond to our demand for repayment.
Moving forward, we will now use a much more reasonable default
withholding rate of 10 percent of monthly benefits - similar to
the current rate in the SSI program.
2. We will be reframing our guidance and procedures
so that the burden of proof shifts away from the claimant in
determining whether there is any evidence that the claimant was
at fault in causing the overpayment.
3. For the vast majority of beneficiaries who request
to work out a repayment plan, we recently changed our policy so
that we will approve repayment plans of up to 60 months. To
qualify, Social Security beneficiaries would only need to
provide a verbal summary of their income, resources, and
expenses, and recipients of the means-tested SSI program would
not need to provide even this summary. This change extended
this easier repayment option by an additional two years (from
36 to 60 months).
4. Finally, we will be making it much easier for
overpaid beneficiaries to request a waiver of repayment, in the
event they believe themselves to have been without any fault
and/or without the ability to repay.
Implementing these policy changes - with proper education
and training across the people, policies, and systems of the
agency - is an important but complex shift. We are undertaking
that shift with urgency, diligence, and speed.
There are some changes that can only be effectuated by the
will and good judgment of Congress. I look forward to working
with Members to discuss ideas that could address the root
causes of overpayments.
In addition to our focus on overpayments, we are also
working to increase our processing of SSI underpayments,
particularly for the oldest and highest-priority cases. As of
March 11, we have processed 46,319 underpayments and released
approximately $120 million this fiscal year to our customers
with these aged and priority underpayments, and we are on track
to complete 98 percent of these underpayments by the end of FY
2025.
SecurityStat, Continued
As we continue our SecurityStat rotation into the second
week, on Mondays we focus first on the shamefully long time
that it now takes for state DDSs to make an average initial
disability determination. Ten years ago, when our
appropriations represented a larger share of our annual
outlays, we were able to make these needed determinations in
110 days, but today, operating on less than one percent of
annual outlays, it takes our DDSs an average of 228 days to
make the same initial determinations (Figure 3). We have the
longest average processing time and the highest number of
pending cases ever in the history of our disability program for
initial claims.
In other words, disability applicants are waiting on
average nearly eight months (228 days) for an initial decision
and an additional seven months (223 days) for those who request
a reconsideration. We must do better, and our long-term goal is
to reduce those waits to four months (120 days) each.
Figure 3. Initial Disability Average Processing Times, by State
(FY 2024 to date through 3/9/24)

At the next level of appeal, disability applicants who have
requested a hearing with an administrative law judge (ALJ)
currently face an average wait time of 365 days - a whole year
- to get a decision. We continue to work toward our goal of
issuing hearings decisions within nine months (270 days) on
average.
On Tuesdays of the second week of the SecurityStat
rotation, we focus with the Office of Inspector General at the
table on fraud and the tactics and strategies we can take,
together, to get inside the turning radius of the bad actors.
Following the fraud stat, we focus for one hour, as a group, on
what we can do to reduce the number, expense, and confusion we
inflict upon our customers through long and impossible-to-
understand notices.
That is how we spend our weeks fighting to serve an all-
time high number of customers with a 27-year low in staffing.
Our duty is to serve the people who depend on the benefits they
have earned through Social Security.
I remain encouraged that the overwhelmed, hardworking,
exhausted men and women on the frontlines of this agency -
those who haven't quit to find less stressful or higher paying
jobs elsewhere in the federal government or beyond - still wake
up every day to serve their country by serving their neighbors.
Our FY 2025 Budget
I am confident that with the rapid cadence of
accountability and collaboration that SecurityStat provides,
and continuous solicitation of areas for improvement from
employees and customers, we will begin to make forward
progress, but we cannot do it alone; we need your help to
ensure we have the necessary funding and staffing.
As the mayor of a cash-strapped city and then a recession-
era governor, I'm quite familiar with operating on tight
budgets. I also spent nearly a year intensely studying SSA
materials from the outside before my confirmation. Even with
all of that, SSA's budget is far more dire than I thought.
Years of underfunding have decimated our staffing levels and
therefore also our ability to serve the public.
Coming off a challenging budget year in FY 2024, it is
critical that we receive adequate funding in FY 2025. Approval
of the FY 2025 President's Budget request of $15.4 billion for
SSA would allow us to begin making progress toward improving
customer service.
We know that additional funding makes a difference. The
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) received an infusion
of funding and increased its satisfaction and trust among
veterans from 50 percent to nearly 80 percent. The Internal
Revenue Service (IRS) used additional funding to reduce its
call wait times from thirty minutes to four minutes. SSA was
able to dig out of the initial disability claims backlog during
the Great Recession with significant funding provided through
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009. I am
confident we can do it again, but it will take sufficient
funding, just as it did for IRS and VA.
Under the FY 2025 President's Budget, we would be able to
restore staffing to FY 2023 levels and begin to improve our
service delivery. The Budget supports an infusion of staff in
our teleservice centers to significantly reduce 800 Number wait
times, to 12 minutes in FY 2025. The Budget will also expand
staffing and overtime in the DDSs, yielding an expected 185,000
more initial disability claims processed and over 100,000 more
reconsiderations than we estimate processing in FY 2024. We
will focus on those customers waiting the longest for a
decision, which will pave the way for dramatic improvements in
average processing time. The Budget also includes the resources
needed to reduce the hearings backlog and prevent its
recurrence as we work down the initial claims backlog.
IN CONCLUSION
The American people worked their whole lives to earn the
benefits of Social Security - and those benefits include the
right to an appropriate level of customer service. I have every
confidence that a restoration of service levels at Social
Security - here and now - will produce a dividend of trust for
generations to come.
Let me say, finally, on behalf of the agency, how grateful
I am for the funding level proposed in the FY 2025 President's
Budget. This additional funding will be a huge help in our
mission to provide the American people with a level of customer
service for which they've already paid, but have in recent
years consistently been denied.
I look forward to answering your questions.
It is my great honor to serve the people of our republic in
my capacity as their Commissioner of Social Security.
=======================================================================
Questions for the Record
=======================================================================
U.S. Senate Special Committee on Aging
"Keeping our Promise to Older Adults and People with Disabilities: The
Status of Social Security Today"
March 20, 2024
Questions for the Record
Commissioner Martin O'Malley
Chairman Robert P. Casey, Jr.
Question:
Federal law requires that Supplemental Security Income
(SSI) beneficiaries be provided the opportunity to apply for
the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) when they
are applying for SSI. SSI benefits are modest, at only about
$940 a month, which means that SSI beneficiaries are forced to
seek assistance through other Federal programs to try to make
ends meet. Through the combined application demonstration
project (CAP), the Social Security Administration works in
partnership with the U.S. Department of Agriculture to allow
states to implement a streamlined and simplified SNAP
application process for applicants for or recipients of SSI.
Pennsylvania is one of a number of states that has implemented
CAP. Despite these efforts, I've heard from Pennsylvanians that
SNAP uptake among SSI applicants and beneficiaries remains a
concern. What additional measures is SSA considering to improve
SNAP access for SSI beneficiaries?
Response:
Our policy requires employees to inform all applicants and
beneficiaries about the availability of SNAP benefits and to
assist SSI applicants and beneficiaries who live in SSI only
households with filing SNAP applications. We are working with
the Food and Nutrition Service (FNS) at the U.S. Department of
Agriculture to provide our employees serving CAP states,
including Pennsylvania, refresher training and up-to-date
processing instructions. Additionally, we support FNS in their
efforts to expand the use of electronic SNAP applications in
additional states, as well as the use of verbal attestation for
paper SNAP applications over the phone. Relatedly, as of
September 30, 2024, our definition of public assistance
households includes households receiving SNAP, which will allow
more people to qualify for SSI and increase some recipients'
SSI payment amounts.
Senator Elizabeth Warren
Social Security Offsets
The student debt crisis is increasingly a crisis for older
Americans. In 2023, more than 3.5 million Americans aged 60 and
older held a total of over $125 billion in student loan
debt.\1\ This represents a six-fold increase in the number of
older borrowers and a nineteen-fold increase in the amount owed
by older Americans compared to 2004.\2\ Unfortunately, older
borrowers often face the greatest repayment struggles, with
nearly 40 percent of Federal borrowers over the age of 65 in
default on their student loans.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ New America, "Why Do So Many Older Americans Owe Student
Loans?," Tia Caldwell and Sarah Sattelmeyer, May 31, 2023, https://
www.newamerica.org/education-policy/edcentral/why-do-so-many-older-
americans-owestudent- loans/.
\2\ Id.
\3\ Consumer Reports, "Student Loan Servicing Issues Contribute to
Older Borrowers' Default," January 5, 2017, https://
www.consumerreports.org/consumerist/student-loan-servicing-issues-
contribute-to-older-borrowers-defaults/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Treasury Offset Program (TOP), established under the
Debt Collection Improvement Act of 1996, authorizes the
Treasury Department to withhold up to 15 percent of Social
Security benefits to collect on defaulted Federal student loan
debt.\4\ As a growing number of older Americans have Federal
student loan debt when they near or enter retirement age, I am
concerned that these older borrowers are disproportionately
subject to TOP collection. Under Federal law, the head of a
benefit-paying agency may request the Treasury Secretary exempt
certain Federal payments from administrative offset when such
offset wouldn't end to interfere substantially with or defeat
the purposes of the payment certifying agency's program.\5\
Social Security offsets can push beneficiaries closer to-or
even into-poverty, undermining the Social Security Act's
mission of providing for the general welfare, basic economic
security, and the well-being of vulnerable Americans.\6\
Accordingly, I led a letter with more than 30 lawmakers urging
you, Secretary Yellen, and Secretary Cardona to consider
seeking an end to administrative offset of student loan debts
for all Social Security benefits.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ The Debt Collection Improvement Act of 1996, Public Law 104-
134.
\5\ The Secretary's exemption authority appears at 31 U.S.C.
3716(c)(3)(B), which reads: "The Secretary of the Treasury
shall exempt from administrative offset under this subsection payments
under means-tested programs when requested by the head of the
respective agency. The Secretary may exempt other payments from
administrative offset under this subsection upon the written request of
the head of a payment certifying agency. A written request for
exemption of other payments must provide justification for the
exemption under standards prescribed by the Secretary. Such standards
shall give due consideration to whether administrative offset would
tend to interfere substantially with or defeat the purposes of the
payment certifying agency's program. The Secretary shall report to the
Congress annually on exemptions granted under this section."
\6\ The Social Security Act, Public Law 74-271.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question:
Are you concerned about Social Security benefit offsets for
defaulted student loan debt pushing seniors closer to or below
the poverty line?
Response:
We acknowledge your letter and are discussing this issue
with the Department of the Treasury and the Department of
Education.
Question:
What steps does SSA plan on taking to address the impact of
Social Security offsets for defaulted student loan debt on
vulnerable seniors?
Response:
Please see our response to the previous question.
Cuts to SSA administrative funding
Republicans know that their proposals to cut Social
Security benefits or raise the retirement age are hugely
unpopular. Years ago, they decided to take another route--
cutting the Social Security Administration's (SSA) operating
budget. From 2011 to 2023, the SSA's customer service budget
fell 17 percent (adjusted for inflation), with staffing
consequently falling by 16 percent to a 25-year low.\7\ These
cuts occurred as the number of Social Security beneficiaries
grew by almost 22 percent.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, "Social Security
Administration Needs Additional Funding to Avoid Exacerbating Customer
Service Crisis," Kathleen Romig, September 22, 2023,https://
www.cbpp.org/blog/social-security-administration-needs-additional-
funding-to-avoid-exacerbating-customer-service.
\8\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Administrative cuts have placed significant strain on the
agency, and both staff and beneficiaries have been forced to
bear the consequences. Wait times on the agency's phone lines
and for disability determinations saw record highs in 2023,
meaning beneficiaries cannot resolve problems with their
benefits in a timely fashion.\9\ And rising costs and a growing
caseload may force the agency to freeze hiring, furlough staff,
close offices, cut overtime, and pause IT modernization.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Id.
\10\ Id.; Based on conversations between SSA staff and the office
of U.S. Senator Elizabeth Warren.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question:
How can SSA use existing funding and authorities to
mitigate the problems that cuts to administrative funding have
caused for beneficiaries and agency staff?
Response:
The $100 million increase in funding for Fiscal Year (FY)
2024 was not nearly enough to cover the over $600 million in
mandatory fixed cost increases that must be absorbed across the
agency, including Federal pay raises, health benefits,
security/guard services, postage, rent, lease renewals, and
other costs required to provide service to customers in our
more than 1,500 field and hearings offices across the country,
as well as the State Disability Determination Services (DDSs).
With the funding we received, we are making some
improvements in our technology and providing for some targeted
hiring to our frontline operations. The existing funding also
allows us to provide overtime to our frontline operations to
address some of our backlogs. In addition to improvements in
technology, we continue to seek other ways, such as policy
simplification and training, to conduct business more
efficiently.
Through the SecurityStat process, we are using data-driven
biweekly leadership meetings to track and align on key
performance measures as we tackle some of the agency's top
priorities. These meetings focus on identifying and defining
leading actions and implementing change. The agency also
recently published our 2024 Action Plan-the product of over
5,000 recommendations from our employees as well as external
stakeholders-which lays out 27 Strategic Initiatives. Although
action on each of the initiatives has already begun, many will
take more than just the year to fully accomplish and will
require continued investments. Some examples of our Quick Wins
include:
Launched eSignature and Documents Upload to local
offices and Workload Support Units nationwide (about 28,000
employees). Fifty (50) agency forms and seventy-nine (79)
evidence types are now available for customer electronic
signature (when a signature is required) and upload.
Increased use of Intelligent Medical Language
Analysis Generation (IMAGEN) by 109 percent from October 2023
through July 2024, and introduced the use of IMAGEN at the
appeals levels. IMAGEN is a disability decision support tool
that facilitates quicker disability determinations.
Restored a pre-2018 policy, known as collateral
estoppel, to allow technicians to apply a prior determination
of disability, reducing duplication and processing times.
Updated our policies so that technicians can use a
simplified administrative waiver process for waiver requests on
overpayments of up to $2,000 (an increase from $1,000).
FY 2025 is a critical year for recovery after years of
chronic underfunding, and at the same time beneficiaries
continue to grow. We cannot prevent further service degradation
and commit to face-to-face public service without an increase
to our funding. The Fiscal Year 2025 President's Budget request
of $15.402 billion for SSA would provide an increase of nearly
$1.2 billion over Fiscal Year 2024. This level of funding is
critical to recovering from the setbacks we experienced in
Fiscal Year 2024 due to the limited funding increase and
resulting extended hiring freeze. The Fiscal Year 2025
President's Budget would allow us to:
Restore our staffing levels to Fiscal Year 202023
levels;
Reduce wait times on our 800 Number by over 20
minutes to 12 minutes;
Reduce initial disability claims wait times to an
average of 215 days;
Reduce the claims backlog by 15 percent;
Continue to address overpayment and underpayment
injustices;
Increase our information technology (IT) budget to
help us modernize and provide more efficient and customer-
focused service; and
Cover an annual increase of over $600 million in our
fixed costs.
Question:
How can SSA better work with Federal employee unions to
address staff concerns and improve hiring and retention?
Response:
What I've learned is that you have to meet people where
they are, and you have to listen to employees for the best
ideas to improve our service. Our labor partners represent our
employees. If we're going to serve the American people better,
we have to recognize our employees' concerns.
SSA's monthly labor roundtables and new Union Management
Cooperation Council meetings provide regular opportunities to
maintain an open dialog between Labor and management at all
levels of SSA, which improves employee morale and efficiency.
For example, we:
Worked with the American Federation of Government
Employees (AFGE) to rollout timely improvements like our
Automated Medicare process, which reduces back-end employee
processing time of online Medicare claims from seven minutes to
seven seconds.
Incorporated AFGE pre-decisional input on new-hire
employee training, which has been a key area of improvement
toward retention of staff.
The unions and National Council for Social Security
Management Association joined me in sending a message to
encourage employees to participate in responding to the annual
Federal Employee Viewpoint Survey (FEVS). This messaging
resulted in the highest response rate since OPM began surveying
all SSA employees.
Question:
What does the SSA need from Congress to fully address the
problems caused by administrative funding cuts?
Response:
Approval of the President's requested funding for Fiscal
Year 202025 would allow us to hire more staff in our Field
Offices (FOs), Payment Centers (PCs), and DDSs, and also make
some critical improvements to our legacy technology. Increased
staffing in the President's Budget is critical to getting SSA
back toward our goals of 120 days for disability determinations
and five-minute average speed of answer rates for phone
service. Specifically, the Fiscal Year 2025 budget would make
the following investments:
$269 million to restore staffing in our FOs to our
Fiscal Year 202023 levels. This would allow the FOs to deliver
quicker decisions on disability and retirement claims, shorten
wait times for appointments, and improve FO telephone service.
$1.7 billion for IT services to maintain and
continue to modernize our large IT infrastructure and increase
our suite of digital and automated services.
$85 million for our PCs to handle more complex
transactions and address the PC backlogs.
$2.8 billion for payroll, hiring, workload
processing costs, and other expenses in the State DDSs to
support reducing the initial disability claims backlog (e.g.,
by allowing us to hire about 2,900 people to expand processing
capacity.
President Biden's plan to extend Social Security's solvency
Social Security has a solvency problem, which threatens the
retirement security of 70 million seniors who spent their
entire lives paying into this program. That leaves us with two
options: One, we can shore-up the program's finances by making
the wealthy pay their fair share. Or two, we can cut benefits
for millions of hard-working Americans who rely on Social
Security to make ends meet.
The answer is clear to Democrats and President Biden.
Today, because payroll taxes for Social Security are capped at
$160,600, billionaires like Jeff Bezos and Elon Musk pay into
the Social Security Trust fund just as much as your
neighborhood dentist. That is flat out wrong.
Question:
How does President Biden's plan--which does not raise taxes
on anyone making less than $400,000--extend Social Security's
solvency?
Response:
As you saw in the Budget, the President is committed to
protecting and strengthening Social Security, including
supporting efforts to improve Social Security benefits, as well
as Supplemental Security Income benefits for seniors and people
with disabilities, especially for those who face the greatest
challenges making ends meet. The Budget makes clear that the
President will reject proposals to cut benefits or go back on
our commitments to America's seniors, and that extending
solvency should start with asking the highest income Americans
to pay their fair share.
The President is focused on making sure that seniors and
people with disabilities can access the benefits they have
earned, which is why his Budget will invest in Social Security
services.
Question:
Congressional Republicans have floated raising the
retirement age to extend Social Security's solvency. If
successful, what would a higher retirement age mean for the
lifelong benefits of Social Security recipients? How would it
affect individuals with physically taxing jobs, who often have
to retire early?
Response:
We cannot speak to a proposal's effects on the Trust Funds,
the agency, and beneficiaries without reviewing the legislative
language or specific provisions, but we are happy to provide
technical assistance to Congress and the Administration. As
noted above, the Biden Administration has made clear that it
opposes any proposal that would cut Social Security benefits,
including raising the retirement age.
Senator Raphael Warnock
Overpayment Policy
The Social Security Administration announced that starting
March 25, 2024, overpaid beneficiaries would no longer have 100
percent of their monthly benefits intercepted by default, in
addition to several other changes.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Social Security Announces Four Key Updates to Address Improper
Payments, (Mar. 20, 2024), https://www.ssa.gov/news/press/releases/
2024/#3-2024-3.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question:
How can overpaid beneficiaries who received notices prior
to March 25 receive relief?
Response:
In late June, we began notifying individuals who are
currently repaying an overpayment created prior to April 15 and
at a rate greater than 10 percent. This notice provides them
the option to request a lower rate of recovery. We released
these notices in weekly batches, prioritizing individuals with
the highest withholding. We released the last batch of notices
the week of September 9. Generally, we will change the benefit
withholding to 10 percent (or $10, whichever is greater) for
those who contact us, unless an exception (which is uncommon)
applies, such as if the overpayment was due to fraud.
Beneficiaries can also request that we withhold less than 10
percent.
Anyone who has not yet contacted us is encouraged to do so
by calling Social Security at 1-800-772-1213 or through their
local Social Security office.
For new overpayments created on or after April 15, 2024, we
have updated our systems to automatically apply the new,
default 10 percent benefit withholding rate without the
beneficiary needing to request it. These updates took effect
with new benefit withholdings that began in August 2024.
Question:
If previously overpaid beneficiaries are required to
proactively ask the agency for their monthly benefits to be
restored, how many eligible beneficiaries does the agency
expect will reach out?
Response:
Under our prior 100 percent withholding posture, most
beneficiaries did not have full withholding. Based on
information from January 2024, of the beneficiaries who have
some level of withholding to recover an overpayment, only about
23 percent (around 136,700) beneficiaries had a withholding
rate greater than 10 percent.
In line with our new default rate, we released outreach
notices to beneficiaries who have more than 10 percent of their
benefit withheld to collect an overpayment. Although we do not
have a formal estimate on how many beneficiaries may reach out,
the response to these notices has been significant and we have
seen a spike in call volumes.
We recently finished our outreach efforts and have sent out
almost 170,000 notices to the affected beneficiaries. As of the
end of September, over 34,000 people have contacted us and
gotten a lower rate. In the short term, we expect to see this
number continue to rise; however, over the long-term, with the
lowering of the default withholding rate, we expect to see a
decrease in the number of individuals who contact the agency to
establish a different rate or repayment.
Question:
What plans, if any, does the agency have in place to ensure
previously overpaid beneficiaries know their options for
relief?
Response:
In addition to press releases, a blog, and a Dear Colleague
Letter (shared with the advocate community and other third-
party groups and organizations), in late June 2024, we began
sending notices to individuals whose benefit withholding is
currently greater than 10 percent of their total monthly
benefit, encouraging them to contact us to request a lower
withholding rate.
Question:
How will the agency evaluate these new policies in real
time to ensure their effectiveness?
Response:
We expect to monitor the outcomes of waiver requests and
perform quality reviews. We will finalize our evaluation plan
when we have a complete list of the changes we will be making
to our overpayment policies and procedures.
Question:
Will the agency provide updates to Congress on the rollout
of the new overpayment policies and how they are received by
beneficiaries?
Response:
Yes, I am committed to an open dialog with Congress. When I
launched SecurityStat-standing biweekly leadership meetings to
track and align on key performance measures-I directed that
overpayments would be one of our primary topics in these
meetings. Through these data-driven meetings, we have
established a rigorous course of action for addressing the
problem, and our discussions and hard work continue. Many Hill
staff have already participated to experience the SecurityStat
process. If you or your staff have not already done so, I would
like to invite you to join us any Monday or Tuesday morning so
you can observe a SecurityStat meeting and the ways that we are
actively improving our overpayment processes.
Question:
Generally how many overpaid claims are made due to errors
on behalf of the agency versus the beneficiary?
Response:
We take seriously our responsibility to ensure eligible
individuals receive the benefits to which they are entitled,
and to safeguard the integrity of the benefits programs to
better serve our customers. This includes paying the right
person the right amount at the right time.
In the Old-Age Disability and Survivors Insurance (OASDI)
program, we estimate that we paid approximately $1.3 trillion
to beneficiaries in Fiscal Year 202022. Of that total, we
estimate that $6.5 billion were overpayments, representing
approximately 0.51 percent of outlays. Of those overpayments,
we estimate that approximately $1.6 billion (around 25 percent)
were within the agency's control and approximately $4.9 billion
(75 percent) were overpayments outside of the agency's control.
Based on our Fiscal Year 202022 stewardship reviews, we
estimate that we paid approximately $57.6 billion to SSI
recipients. Of that total, we estimate about $4.6 billion were
overpayments, representing approximately 8.02 percent of
outlays. Of those overpayments, we estimate that approximately
$287 million (around six percent) were within the agency's
control (i.e., errors attributable to SSA)\12\. The remaining
$4.3 billion were due to factors outside of our control.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ We use the term "error dollars" to reference an incorrect
payment made to a case as a whole. We further define to errors
attributable to the agency as those that are "within the agency's
control." These are errors which are due to our failure to access data
or information needed, or when the beneficiary or third-party provided
data or information necessary to accurately compute the benefit amount,
but we failed to use it to validate the payment accuracy prior to
making a payment. Overpayments outside of the agency's control occur
when we are unable to access data needed to validate payment accuracy
because the beneficiary or a third-party either did not provide or
provided inaccurate information necessary to compute the accurate
benefit amount.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For more information, please see SSA's Fiscal Year 202023
Agency Financial Report or paymentaccuracy.gov.
Funding for the Social Security Administration
According to the Social Security Administration, nearly 71
million people receive Social Security benefits.\13\ While
Congress must do everything in its power to protect and
strengthen these benefits, it is also important to acknowledge
the administrative role of the Social Security Administration
and what seniors expect in terms of customer service.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Fast Facts & Figures About Social Security, Social Security
Office of Retirement and Disability Policy, https://www.ssa.gov/policy/
docs/chartbooks/fast--facts/2023/fast--facts23.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question:
If Congress continues to underfund the Social Security
Administration, what happens to your staff's ability to provide
customer service to beneficiaries?
Response:
We have experienced years of chronic underfunding while at
the same time the number of beneficiaries continues to grow.
Underfunding impacts our ability to hire and degrades customer
service in key areas such as claims processing times,
scheduling appointments, and telephone service. For example,
from Fiscal Year 2017 to Fiscal Year 2023, wait times on our
National 800 Number tripled and disability decision wait times
doubled.
SSA's budget was essentially level from Fiscal Year 2018
through Fiscal Year 2021 while costs continued to increase,
leading to difficult decisions to cut funding in certain areas,
such as overtime and staffing. As a result, we ended Fiscal
Year 2022 with our lowest staffing level in over 50 years.
While we made some progress with the funding we received in
Fiscal Year 2023, our Fiscal Year 2024 enacted appropriation of
$14.227 billion provided an increase of only $100 million. This
increase is not nearly enough to cover the over $600 million in
mandatory fixed cost increases that we must absorb across the
agency each year, including Federal pay raises, health
benefits, security/guard services, postage, rent, lease
renewals, and other costs required to provide service to
customers in our more than 1,500 field and hearings offices
across the country, as well as the State DDS.
The Fiscal Year 2025 President's Budget request of $15.402
billion for SSA would provide an increase of nearly $1.2
billion over Fiscal Year 2024 and is critical to recovery from
setbacks we experienced in Fiscal Year 2024 due to the extended
hiring freeze and limited funding increase. This budget would
allow us to:
Restore staffing to Fiscal Year 2023 levels after
dropping to one of the lowest levels in over 50 years;
Reduce wait times on our 800 Number by over 20
minutes to 12 minutes;
Reduce initial disability claims wait times to an
average of 215 days;
Reduce the claims backlog by 15 percent;
Continue to address overpayment and underpayment
injustices;
Increase our information technology (IT) budget to
help us modernize and provide more efficient and customer-
focused service; and
Cover an annual increase of over $600 million in our
fixed costs.
In contrast, the House is proposing a total of $13.826
billion for SSA's Fiscal Year 2025 operating budget, which is
almost a $1.6 billion reduction from the Fiscal Year 2025
President's Budget request, and $401 million below Fiscal Year
2024 enacted levels. This level of reduction, combined with the
fixed cost increases mean we would need to absorb over $1
billion in Fiscal Year 2025-the equivalent to about 10,000
workyears (WY). Thousands of these WYs would need to come from
our frontline operations resulting in a direct, negative impact
on our ability to deliver services to the American public.
The Senate is proposing a total budget of $14.736 billion
for SSA, which is over $910 million more than the proposed
House level and $509 million more than our Fiscal Year 2024
current operating level. While we appreciate the increase, this
level of funding is still $666 million below the President's
Budget request and would not fully cover our mandatory fixed
cost increases of over $600 million in Fiscal Year 2025.
We are currently operating under a continuing resolution
through December. Should the challenges of level funding
continue for all of Fiscal Year 2025, there would be severely,
detrimental effects on services. We would be forced to freeze
all staffing for SSA and in our State DDSs. Without sufficient
staff, we would need to close offices and reduce the hours we
are open to the public, cutting off vital access to face-to-
face service delivery and extending wait times for those
waiting for a decision on an initial disability claim.
FY 2025 is a critical year for recovery after years of
chronic underfunding at the same time beneficiaries continue to
grow. We cannot prevent further service degradation and commit
to face-to-face public service without an increase to our
funding. While it will take a multi-year effort and continuous,
sufficient funding to significantly reduce wait times and
backlogs, the President's Budget request for $15.402 billion
for SSA puts us on the right path by helping us restore
staffing losses, process significantly more work, and serve
more people.
Social Security Disability Insurance Backlogs
Across the country, people wait for an average of 220 days-
over seven months-to get their disability benefits initially
processed.\14\ This is a nationwide crisis, with average
processing times higher in November 2023 than at any point in
the last 14 years.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Lorie Konish, More than 1 million are waiting for Social
Security to process initial disability claims, CNBC (Nov. 1, 2023),
https://www.cnbc.com/2023/11/01/over-1-million-people-are-waiting-on-
social-security-disability-claims.html.
\15\ SSA State Agency Monthly Workload Data, Social Security
Administration, https://www.ssa.gov/disability/data/ssa-sa-mowl.htm.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question:
While part of the burden to address backlogs falls on State
agencies, how is the extremely low operating budget at your
agency contributing to these challenges?
Response:
As a result of historic underfunding and increased costs,
we had to make difficult decisions to cut funding in certain
areas, such as staffing and overtime, which means we now have
fewer people available to work on the disability claims
backlog. We serve about 14 million more beneficiaries now than
we did in 2010, with about 12,000 fewer staff.
Despite these challenges, we continue to tackle long wait
times for disability determinations. As seen in the chart
below, as of August 2024, our current average processing time
for disability claims was around 189 days (for more detailed
information related to the disability program, we invite you to
visit our SecurityStat website).
  T6473.004
With the President's Fiscal Year 2025 Budget request, we
expect to complete 185,000 more initial disability claims than
in Fiscal Year 2024. With increased funding, we would be able
to provide additional hiring and overtime for our frontline
operations which would greatly assist in providing timely
service and addressing backlogs.\16\ However, as described in
Actuarial Note 163, applications for benefits are expected to
continue increasing, making these investments even more
critical.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Although the States make determinations at the initial and
reconsideration levels of the disability process, individuals interact
with federal employees throughout all stages of the initial claims and
review process as well as after they become entitled to or eligible for
benefits. For example, if an applicant requests further review, they
move into our appeals process which is administered at the federal
level.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question:
With significant backlogs in disability claims processing,
certain hospitals in Georgia are at risk of losing access to
critical programs that allow them to provide care to
underserved communities. These Federal programs require
hospitals to meet a formula set in statute that considers how
many of the hospitals' patients are on Social Security
Disability Insurance.\17\ Is your agency aware that these
backlogs have ripple effects that could devaState hospitals?
Within the scope of your agency's authority, will you commit to
doing everything you can to address this crisis?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ Senators Reverend Warnock, Ossoff Push Senate Leadership to
Prevent Potential Closures of Hospitals Serving Low-Income Georgians,
(Dec. 19, 2023), https://www.warnock.senate.gov/newsroom/press-
releases/senators-reverend-warnock-ossoff-push-senate-leadership-to-
prevent-potential-closures-of-hospitals-serving-low-income-georgians/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Response:
We are working within our current funding to adjust our
processes to address the backlog. However, significant
improvements in disability processing times will require
sufficient funding and staffing.
We know that additional funding makes a difference. With
the President's FY 2025 Budget request, we would direct $2.8
billion of the proposed funding to payroll, hiring, workload
processing costs, and other expenses in the State DDSs to
support reducing the large backlog of initial disability
claims. We would expand processing capacity at the DDS offices
by hiring about 2,900 people. This hiring would return total
DDS staff to Fiscal Year 2023 levels. As of August 2024, the
total DDS staff is 14,400.
I have committed to making customer service improvements my
top priority, starting with reducing disability decision wait
times.
Student Loan Debt for Social Security Beneficiaries
Several of my colleagues recently sent you a letter, urging
SSA, the U.S. Department of the Treasury (Treasury), and the
U.S. Department of Education (ED) and 'to consider seeking an
end to the practice of offsetting Social Security benefits to
pay off defaulted student loans.\18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Warren, Wyden, Pressley, Jayapal, Grijalva, Larson, Lawmakers
Call on Biden Administration to Stop Withholding Social Security
Payments to Pay Defaulted Student Loans, (Mar. 20, 2024), https://
www.warren.senate.gov/newsroom/press-releases/warren-wyden-pressley-
jayapal-grijalva-larson-lawmakers-call-on-biden-administration-to-stop-
withholding-social-security-payments-to-pay-defaulted-student-loans
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The letter noted:
he number of older Americans with student loan
debt has been rising steadily. In 2023, over 3.5 million
Americans aged 60 and older had outstanding student loan debt,
worth a total of over $125 billion. This represents a sixfold
increase in the number of older borrowers and a nineteenfold
increase in the amount owed by older Americans compared to
2004.
Unfortunately, older borrowers often face the
greatest repayment struggles, with nearly 40 percent of Federal
borrowers over the age of 65 in default on their student loans.
These borrowers who have struggled with their student loan
repayment progress could see their wages, tax refunds, and
Social Security checks garnished or offset. Under TOP, the
Federal Government can withhold up to 15 percent of monthly
Social Security or disability benefits for defaulted student
loans. Roughly 44 percent of borrowers who were 50 years and
older at the time of their initial offset were subject to this
maximum Social Security benefit withholding. When borrowers are
in collections, on average their Social Security benefits are
estimated to be reduced by $2,500 annually. This can be a
devastating blow to those who rely on Social Security as their
primary source of income. According to SSA, Social Security
benefits represented 90 percent or more of total income for
about one-third of beneficiaries aged 65 and older in 2014, the
last year of available data.
There is little evidence that these offsets are a
meaningful solution to collecting outstanding debt. Almost a
third of borrowers 50 and older who had offsets lasting five
years or longer had their loan balances increase during this
time period, and more than 70 percent of the loan repayments
collected through Social Security offsets were applied to fees
and interest. Nonetheless, in the years prior to the March 2020
COVID-19 student loan payment pause, the number of Social
Security beneficiaries subjected to offsets due to defaults
surged dramatically. From Fiscal Year 2002 to 2015, the number
of defaulted Federal student loan borrowers of any age with
Social Security offsets more than quadrupled, jumping from
around 36,000 to 173,000 borrowers. This trend was particularly
pronounced for borrowers aged 65 and older; the number of
borrowers in  that age range with offsets increased by a
staggering 540 percent. By Fiscal Year 202015, Social Security
checks of approximately 114,000 borrowers aged 50 and older
were being offset to repay defaulted Federal student loans.\19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question:
Will you explore every legal avenue within your authority
to end administrative offset of student loan debts for all
Social Security benefits?
Under the Debt Collection Improvement Act, the head of SSA
may request the Treasury Secretary exempt certain Federal
payments from administrative offset when such offset wouldn't
end to interfere substantially with or defeat the purposes of
the payment certifying agency's program.\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ 31 U.S.C. 3716(c)(3)(B)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Response:
Thank you for your question. We are discussing this issue
with the Department of the Treasury and the Department of
Education.
Question:
Have you considered exploring this request authority? If
not, will you commit to exploring this request authority? Under
what circumstances would you request such exemptions?
Response:
Please see our immediately preceding answer.
Question:
Do you believe offsetting Social Security benefits, which
can push beneficiaries into poverty, undermines the Social
Security Act's mission of providing for "the general welfare,"
basic economic security, and the well-being of vulnerable
Americans?
Response:
Thank you for your question, and I take seriously the
responsibility for the millions of Americans who depend on
Social Security, including the many seniors who live in poverty
without these benefits.
Senator John Fetterman
Question:
My office has received two complaints about Pennsylvanians
getting denied access to interpreter services. The first
complaint states that a Spanish-speaking Pennsylvanian
contacted the Lewiston Field Office of the SSA by phone and
requested an interpreter on February 10, 2022, but she was not
provided one until the SSA Regional Director's office was
contacted. The second complaint stated that a Pennsylvanian
visited the Scranton Field Office in person and requested an
interpreter but was not provided one on April 22, 2022.
According to the field office agent, the individual was
sufficiently fluent in English and did not need one, even
though the individual did not feel comfortable conducting her
interview in English and specifically requested one. Do you
agree that anyone at Social Security field offices who asks for
an interpreter should get interpreter services regardless of
whether an SSA employee believes they are proficient in
English?
Response:
As required under Executive Order 13166, SSA's Language
Access Plan reflects our commitment to provide substantially
equal and meaningful access to Social Security benefits and
services to all people, regardless of their English
proficiency. On April 11, 2024, we facilitated a Language
Access Update for various external stakeholders to highlight
our Plan and learn more about how we can improve service to
individuals with Limited English Proficiency (LEP).
Question:
It is my understanding that the SSA's General Counsel's
office dismissed allegations of discrimination and did not
follow through on initial offers for mediation. Do you agree
that Pennsylvanians who have been denied interpreter services
should get mediation and speak directly with SSA field offices
to avoid this situation in the future?
Response:
We investigated these two complaints and determined there
was no discrimination involved, and neither was denied an
interpreter. In both instances, policy was followed for these
two walk-in customers. One customer opted to proceed in English
and successfully completed her business, and the other customer
opted to schedule an appointment to include interpretation with
a vendor at no cost to her. As part of the complaint
investigation, the agency reached out to each customer directly
to discuss their experiences, in alignment with agency policy
and procedure, including privacy safeguards.
We regret any inconvenience to your constituents and
appreciate you raising your concerns. Our employees receive
training on language assistance services, and we issue nation-
wide guidance on available resources when assisting customers
with LEP. Additionally, our Regional Communications Directors
are available to help facilitate any local service needs.
Question:
I commend SSA for recently strengthening its Language
Access Plan, but these policies must be communicated to SSA
staff in the form of instructions and procedures to ensure that
meaningful access to services for limited English proficiency
customers is actually provided. It is my understanding that
such instructions exist in the POMS (Section GN 00203.011 of
the POMS "Special Interviewing Situations--Limited English
Proficiency (LEP) or When Language Assistance Required") but
this has been deemed "sensitive and not available to the
public." Most of the POMS is already available online but this
section is not. Why does SSA consider language access policy
and procedure in its POMS something that must be concealed from
the public?
Response:
SSA's POMS section concerning Limited English Proficiency
is not publicly available because it contains sensitive
information related to our procedures for using SSA's telephone
interpreter service when interviewing the public. We recently
released a public version of this POMS section (GN 00203.011)
on September 18, 2024.
Question:
Will you agree to share the full text of Section GN
00203.011 of the POMS, "Special Interviewing Situations--
Limited English Proficiency (LEP) or When Language Assistance
Required," with my office?
Response:
Yes. We shared a full copy of this POMS section with your
office on July 2, 2024.
=======================================================================
Statements for the Record
=======================================================================
U.S. Senate Special Committee on Aging
"Keeping our Promise to Older Adults and People with Disabilities: The
Status of Social Security Today"
March 20, 2024
Statement for the Record
Testimony of the American Association of Retired Persons (AARP)
AARP, which advocates for the more than 100 million
Americans age 50 and older, thanks you for holding today's
important hearing on Keeping Our Promise to Older Adults and
People with Disabilities: The Status of Social Security Today.
Social Security has an unparalleled nearly 90-year track record
of success, is incredibly popular with the American people, and
serves as a lifeline for millions of older Americans and their
families. Congress should and must do more, therefore, not only
to protect Social Security, but also to improve the vital
services provided by the agency.
The Importance of Social Security
According to the Social Security Administration (SSA), more
than 67 million Americans are currently receiving the money
they have earned from Social Security after a lifetime of hard
work and contributions. Social Security is the principal source
of income for over 40 percent of older American households, and
roughly one in six older households depend on it for nearly all
of their income. Despite its critical importance, people's
average checks are modest.
Nonetheless, Social Security lifts approximately 16.5
million older Americans out of poverty and allows millions more
to live their retirement years independently, without fear of
outliving their income.
Increased Funding for SSA Customer Service
AARP believes that older Americans and their families have
earned not only their Social Security, but the right to receive
timely and accurate services from SSA. Unfortunately, service
at the agency has been declining for many years, largely as the
result of underfunding from Congress. This trend must end now.
SSA simply does not have the resources it requires to
provide all services promptly and properly to its customers.
Between 2010 and 2023, SSA's operating budget shrank by 17
percent, even as the number of beneficiaries grew by 22
percent. SSA is also currently experiencing historic lows in
staffing. It is not realistic to expect SSA to provide the
necessary level of service to a growing customer base with a
shrinking workforce and the continued failure of Congress to
approve adequate funding. These failures are having very real
consequences for the American people.
AARP often hears from our members who are frustrated, or
worse, when interacting with the agency. Callers to SSA's
National 1-800 number wait an average of 35 minutes for their
call to be answered, with many hanging up long before then.
American workers filing for disability benefits are
experiencing the longest wait time ever for an initial
determination. For those who are originally denied and seek a
decision from an Administrative Law Judge, they must wait an
additional year on average. Shockingly, more than 10,000 people
die every year while waiting for a final decision on their
disability claims.
To help SSA make necessary improvements to its customer
service, Congress must make available increased funding for the
agency. As such, AARP urges Congress to approve, at a minimum,
the Administration's $15.5 billion request for SSA
administrative expenses for the 2025 fiscal year. With this
additional funding, which comes not from general revenue but
from the Social Security Trust Funds, we expect the agency to
make long-overdue improvements in service and hire top-quality
staff to meet the needs of the American public.
Social Security has a responsibility and a duty to provide
timely and quality service to the public, and Congress has a
duty to ensure the agency has the resources necessary for SSA
to fulfill its mission. We are already nearly halfway through
the 2024 fiscal year, but Congress has lurched from one funding
crisis to another, paralyzing agencies like SSA who need to
hire staff and make long-term investments for the future. Given
that this agency's dollars come mostly from the Social Security
Trust Funds, not general revenue, Congress is effectively
denying the American people the customer service they deserve
and have already paid for via their payroll taxes.
We strongly urge Congress to reverse the trend of denying
SSA the funding it needs, and to ensure those additional
dollars are spent to improve customer service.
Social Security Deserves a Full and Open Debate
Congress must act to ensure Social Security remains strong
for generations to come. According to the most recent Social
Security Trustees' report, Social Security can continue to pay
100 percent of earned benefits until 2034. After that, and
without action from Congress, Social Security can continue to
pay about 80 percent of promised benefits for generations,
falling to 74 percent in 2097. Social Security is not "going
broke" as some have argued, but Congress does need to take
action sooner rather than later to shore up the program's long-
term finances and to ensure the future adequacy of Social
Security.
At the same time, AARP calls on Congress to take up this
important work in an open, transparent way. AARP believes the
Committees of Jurisdiction, which have deep expertise over
Social Security, should be the lead on such efforts, not a new
commission or "super committee." We strongly object to
proposals to create new commissions or committees to address
Social Security. If regular order is the gold standard for
routine legislative matters, it certainly should be the
standard for Social Security.
Moreover, let us be clear that debt and deficits in the
general budget are not the correct lens through which to view
changes to Social Security. Instead, any changes should focus
on the financial and retirement security of the American
people. Social Security is not a driver of the annual deficits
or current national debt. It is not funded by general revenue
but is instead selffinanced. In fact, more than 90 percent of
Social Security is financed by payroll tax contributions from
American workers and employers; around four percent is from
federal income taxes on some Social Security benefits; and
around six percent comes from interest earned on U.S. Treasury
bonds held by the Social Security Trust Funds. Any argument
that claims Social Security is a driver of the national debt -
simply because it receives interest from the U.S. Treasury
bonds it has purchased - is disingenuous at best.
Older Americans agree that Social Security should be
protected in any discussion about the debt or deficit.
According to AARP research, 85 percent of older Americans
oppose targeting Social Security to reduce federal budget
deficits, and this is consistent across political affiliation:
88 percent of Republicans, 79 percent of Independents, and 87
percent of Democrats strongly oppose cutting Social Security to
reduce the debt.
Conclusion
Once again, thank you for holding today's important
hearing. We look forward to working with you to ensure millions
of older Americans and their families receive the high-quality
service they deserve from SSA and to protect their hard-earned
Social Security. If you have any questions, please feel free to
contact me, or have your staff contact Tom Nicholls on our
Government Affairs staff.
Sincerely,
/s/
Bill Sweeney
Senior Vice President
Government Affairs
U.S. Senate Special Committee on Aging
"Keeping our Promise to Older Adults and People with Disabilities: The
Status of Social Security Today"
March 20, 2024
Statement for the Record
Testimony of the Social Security Administration (SSA)
Social Security Administration (SSA) Commissioner Martin
O'Malley requested I follow-up on several questions you raised
during the hearing before the United States Senate Special
Committee on Aging entitled: Keeping Our Promise to Older
Adults and People with Disabilities: The Status of Social
Security Today on March 20, 2024.
During the hearing you raised the topic of fraud in Social
Security programs. I appreciate the opportunity to address your
concerns. The SSA Office of the Inspector General (OIG) serves
the public through independent oversight of SSA's programs and
operations. We accomplish our mission by conducting independent
audits, evaluations, and investigations; searching for and
reporting systemic weaknesses in SSA's programs and operations;
and providing recommendations for program, operations, and
management improvements.
The Reports Consolidation Act of 2000 requires Inspectors
General to summarize and assess the most serious management and
performance challenges facing agencies and the agencies'
progress in addressing those challenges. In FY 2023, SSA OIG
Office of Audit issued 43 products that identified over $2.3
billion in monetary findings. This includes over $1.8 billion
in questioned costs\1\ and over $560 million in funds that
could have been put to better use.\2\ SSA OIG monetary findings
include almost $640 million in underpayments that were owed
beneficiaries/recipients. The $640 million in underpayments are
classified in both categories (questioned costs and funds to
better use). SSA OIG oversight work has a significant impact on
the integrity, effectiveness, and efficiency of SSA's programs
and operations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 5 U.S.C. 405(a)(4): A cost the IG questions because
of: 1. an alleged violation of a provision of a law, regulation,
contract, grant, cooperative agreement, or other agreement or document
governing the expenditure of funds; 2. a finding that, at the time of
the audit, such cost is not supported by adequate documentation; or 3.
a finding that the expenditure of funds for the intended purpose is
unnecessary or unreasonable.
\2\ 5 U.S.C. 405(a)(5): An IG recommendation that funds
could be used more efficiently if Agency management took actions to
implement and complete the recommendation, including: 1. reductions in
outlays; 2. de-obligation of funds from programs or operations; 3.
withdrawal of interest subsidy costs on loans or loan guarantees,
insurance, or bonds; 4. costs not incurred by implementing recommended
improvements related to the operations of the establishment, a
contractor or grantee; 5. avoidance of unnecessary expenditures noted
in pre-award reviews of contract or grant agreements; or 6. any other
savings which are specifically identified.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Commissioner O'Malley's Office of Legislation and
Congressional Affairs requested SSA OIG address three
questions:
1. What is the figure of fraud that would be part of Social
Security?
While this may seem to be a very straight forward question,
it is one that is quite difficult to answer comprehensively and
accurately. The U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO)
recently performed work to answer the same question from a
Federal Government-wide perspective. In April 2024, GAO
released a report entitled, Fraud Risk Management: 2018-2022
Data Show Federal Government Loses an Estimated $233 Billion to
$521 Billion Annually to Fraud, Based on Various Risk. I was
very supportive of GAO's review, and SSA OIG staff worked
closely with GAO on portions of this report related to SSA
fraud.
During GAO's review, SSA OIG and agency officials noted
significant challenges in producing fraud estimates, including
data limitations, and differing definitions of fraud for
recording and summarizing data. GAO previously reported that
agencies identified limitations in expertise, data, and tools
as a significant challenge for their fraud risk management
efforts. These challenges could also impact agencies' ability
to develop effective fraud estimates at a program or agency
level.
According to GAO's report, the Department of the Treasury's
Office of Payment Integrity (OPI) supports agencies facing such
challenges. OPI's resources are dedicated to preventing and
detecting improper payments through a variety of data-matching
and data-analytics services. Therefore, Treasury's OPI may be
positioned with the expertise, data, and analytic tools to
evaluate and advance methods that the federal government can
take to estimate fraud in support of fraud risk management.
2. Beyond fraud, what percentage would there be of payments
made to the wrong beneficiary for the wrong amount?
Effective stewardship of taxpayer funds is a critical
responsibility of the Federal Government. This is especially
true of SSA where over 72 million Americans are receiving an
SSA benefit or SSI payment, totaling over 1.4 trillion dollars
annually, with approximately 10,000 baby boomers becoming
eligible for Social Security Retirement daily. Improper
payments in Federal programs can erode citizens' trust in
government. Improper payments include overpayments and
underpayments, and result from SSA's mistakes in computing
payments, SSA's failure to obtain or act on available
information affecting payments, and beneficiaries' failure to
report an event correctly (or at all).
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-123,
Appendix C (updated March 5, 2021) requires agencies with
programs with annual outlays over $10,000,000 to provide OMB
with improper payments related information on an annual basis.
In addition, the OMB Circular requires agencies with High-
Priority programs (programs reporting improper payments
resulting in monetary loss in excess of $100,000,000) to
provide select improper payments information to OMB on a
quarterly basis. This new approach promotes a more streamlined
and centralized repository for government-wide improper
payments reporting. SSA's latest improper payment information
is available on OMB's www.paymentaccuracy.gov website.
3. We would like your office to get back to kind of categorize
to the best of your ability to do it, how much fraud would be
part of Social Security.
As Commissioner O'Malley pointed out in SSA's written
response to the Special Committee on Aging, SSA OIG issues the
Semiannual Report to Congress, which includes a summary of
allegations by category. SSA OIG's Office of Investigations
receives and evaluates allegations of fraud, waste, abuse, and
mismanagement in SSA's programs and operations, and takes
appropriate action in coordination with federal, state, and
local prosecutors in addressing in fraud.
During Fiscal Year 2023, investigations by SSA OIG resulted
in 555 criminal convictions and contributed to almost $179
million in monetary accomplishments. As you can understand, it
is difficult to provide an actual estimate on the monetary
fraud. SSA OIG's goal is to help SSA prevent, detect, and
eliminate fraud, and we must remain vigilant. For example, on
May 2, 2024, a New Jersey woman was indicted for stealing over
$1 million of federal benefits meant for her deceased aunt over
a 25-year period from the Office of Personnel Management and
SSA. For over two and half decades, this fraud was being
committed and due to the hard work of SSA OIG Special Agents
and Office of Personnel Management OIG Special Agents this
fraud was ended. This case is a representation of many cases
known and unknown.
I trust this information is helpful. I request the Special
Committee on Aging include this letter into the record of the
hearing for future reference. Should you have any further
questions, please have a member of your staff contact SSA OIG's
Congressional Affairs Advisor.
Sincerely,
/s/
Gail S. Ennis
Inspector General
cc: The Honorable Martin O' Malley - Commissioner Social
Security Administration
The Honorable Bob Casey - Chairman US Senate Special
Committee Aging
