  Rules of the Committee on Agriculture U.S. House of Representatives  ADOPTED JANUARY 23, 2025 119th CONGRESS CP 119-1 __________ U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE 58-428 PDF WASHINGTON : 2025 ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania, Chairman FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota, Ranking AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia, Vice Minority Member Chairman DAVID SCOTT, Georgia ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, JIM COSTA, California Arkansas JAMES P. McGOVERN, Massachusetts SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina DOUG LaMALFA, California JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina SHONTEL M. BROWN, Ohio, Vice Ranking TRENT KELLY, Mississippi Minority Member DON BACON, Nebraska SHARICE DAVIDS, Kansas MIKE BOST, Illinois ANDREA SALINAS, Oregon DUSTY JOHNSON, South Dakota DONALD G. DAVIS, North Carolina JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana JILL N. TOKUDA, Hawaii TRACEY MANN, Kansas NIKKI BUDZINSKI, Illinois RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa ERIC SORENSEN, Illinois MARY E. MILLER, Illinois GABE VASQUEZ, New Mexico BARRY MOORE, Alabama JONATHAN L. JACKSON, Illinois KAT CAMMACK, Florida SHRI THANEDAR, Michigan BRAD FINSTAD, Minnesota ADAM GRAY, California JOHN W. ROSE, Tennessee KRISTEN McDONALD RIVET, Michigan RONNY JACKSON, Texas SHOMARI FIGURES, Alabama MONICA De La CRUZ, Texas EUGENE SIMON VINDMAN, Virginia ZACHARY NUNN, Iowa JOSH RILEY, New York DERRICK VAN ORDEN, Wisconsin JOHN W. MANNION, New York DAN NEWHOUSE, Washington APRIL McCLAIN DELANEY, Maryland TONY WIED, Wisconsin ------ ROBERT P. BRESNAHAN, Jr., ------ Pennsylvania MARK B. MESSMER, Indiana MARK HARRIS, North Carolina DAVID J. TAYLOR, Ohio ------------------------------------------------------------------------ Parish Braden, Staff Director Skylar Borchardt, Acting Minority Staff Director TABLE OF CONTENTS Page General Provisions................................1........... I. (a) Applicability of House Rules.................1 (b) Authority to Conduct Investigations..........1 (c) Authority to Print...........................1 (d) Vice Chairman................................2 (e) Presiding Member.............................2 (f) Publication of Rules.........................2 (g) Joint Committee Reports of Investigation or Study..........................................2 Committee Business Meetings.......................2........... II. (a) Regular Meetings.............................2 (b) Additional Meetings..........................3 (c) Special Meetings.............................3 Open Meetings and Hearings; Broadcasting..........4........... III. (a) Open Meetings and Hearings...................4 (b) Broadcasting and Photography.................4 (c) Closed Meetings--Attendees...................4 (d) Addressing the Committee.....................5 (e) Meetings to Begin Promptly...................5 (f) Prohibition on Proxy Voting..................5 (g) Location of Persons at Meetings..............5 (h) Consideration of Amendments and Motions......5 (i) Demanding Record Vote........................5 (j) Submission of Motions or Amendments In Advance of Business Meeting............................6 (k) Points of Order..............................6 (l) Limitation on Committee Sittings.............6 (m) Prohibition of Wireless Telephones...........6 Quorums...........................................7........... IV. (a) Working Quorum...............................7 (b) Majority Quorum..............................7 (c) Quorum for Taking Testimony..................7 Records...........................................7........... V. (a) Maintenance of Records.......................7 (b) Access to and Correction of Records..........8 (c) Property of the House........................8 (d) Availability of Archived Records.............9 (e) Special Rules for Certain Records and Proceedings....................................9 (f) Electronic Availability of Committee Publications...................................9 Power to Sit and Act..............................9........... VI. Subpoenas, Depositions, and Oaths.................9........... VII. (a) Issuance of Subpoenas........................9 (b) Oaths.......................................10 (c) Deposition Authority........................10 Hearing Procedures...............................10........... VIII. (a) Power to Hear...............................10 (b) Announcement................................10 (c) Scheduling of Witnesses.....................11 (d) Written Statement; Oral Testimony...........11 (e) Questioning of Witnesses....................12 (f) Extended Questioning for Designated Members.13 (g) Witnesses for the Minority..................13 (h) Summary of Subject Matter...................13 (i) Open Hearings...............................13 (j) Hearings and Reports........................14 The Reporting of Bills and Resolutions...........15........... IX. (a) Filing of Reports...........................15 (b) Content of Reports..........................15 (c) Supplemental, Minority, Additional, or Dissenting Views..............................18 (d) Printing of Reports.........................18 (e) Immediate Printing; Supplemental Reports....18 (f) Availability of Printed Hearing Records.....19 (g) Committee Prints............................19 (h) Post Adjournment Filing of Committee Reports19 (i) Conference..................................19 Other Committee Activities.......................20........... X. (a) Authorization and Oversight Plan............20 (b) Annual Appropriations.......................21 (c) Budget Act Compliance: Views and Estimates..21 (d) Budget Act Compliance: Recommended Changes..22 (e) Conference Committees.......................22 (f) Hearing on Waste, Fraud, and Abuse..........22 (g) Hearing on Agency Financial Statements......23 (h) Hearing on GAO High-Risk-List...............23 (i) Member Day Hearing..........................23 (j) Activities Report...........................23 Subcommittees....................................24........... XI. (a) Number and Composition......................24 (b) Ratios......................................24 (c) Jurisdiction................................24 (d) Referral of Legislation.....................25 (e) Participation and Service of Committee Members on Subcommittees..............................26 (f) Subcommittee Hearings and Meetings..........27 (g) Subcommittee Action.........................28 (h) Subcommittee Investigations.................28 Committee Budget, Staff, and Travel..............28........... XII. (a) Committee Budget............................28 (b) Committee Staff.............................28 (c) Committee Travel............................29 Amendment of Rules...............................31........... XIII. APPENDIXES Appendix A--Excerpts of House Rules Pertaining to Committee Functions..............................33 Appendix B--Excerpts of Relevant Provisions of Congressional Budget Act of 1974.................73 RULES OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE U.S. House of Representatives 119th Congress I. GENERAL PROVISIONS (a) Applicability of House Rules.--(1) The Rules of the House shall govern the procedure of the Committee and its subcommittees, and the Rules of the Committee on Agriculture so far as applicable shall be interpreted in accordance with the Rules of the House, except that a motion to recess from day to day, and a motion to dispense with the first reading (in full) of a bill or resolution, if printed copies are available, are non-debatable privileged motions in the Committee and its subcommittees. (See Appendix A for the applicable Rules of the U.S. House of Representatives.) (2) As provided in clause 1(a)(1) of House Rule XI, each Subcommittee is part of the Committee and is subject to the authority and direction of the Committee and its Rules so far as applicable. (See also Committee Rules III, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII and XI, infra.) (b) Authority to Conduct Investigations.--The Committee and its subcommittees, after consultation with the Chairman of the Committee, may conduct such investigations and studies as they may consider necessary or appropriate in the exercise of their responsibilities under Rule X of the Rules of the House and in accordance with clause 2(m) of House Rule XI. (c) Authority to Print.--The Committee is authorized by the Rules of the House to have printed and bound testimony and other data presented at hearings held by the Committee and its subcommittees. All costs of stenographic services and transcripts in connection with any meeting or hearing of the Committee and its subcommittees shall be paid from applicable accounts of the House described in clause 1(k)(1) of House Rule X in accordance with clause 1(c) of House Rule XI. (See also paragraphs (d), (e) and (f) of Committee Rule IX.) (d) Vice Chairman.--The Member of the majority party on the Committee or Subcommittee designated by the Chairman of the full Committee shall be the vice chairman of the Committee or Subcommittee in accordance with clause 2(d) of House Rule XI. (e) Presiding Member.--If the Chairman of the Committee or Subcommittee is not present at any Committee or Subcommittee meeting or hearing, the vice chairman shall preside. If the Chairman and vice chairman of the Committee or Subcommittee are not present at a Committee or Subcommittee meeting or hearing the ranking Member of the majority party who is present shall preside in accordance with clause 2(d) of House Rule XI. (f) Publication of Rules.--The Committee's Rules shall be publicly available in electronic form and published in the Congressional Record not later than 60 days after the Chair is elected in each odd-numbered year as provided in clause 2(a) of House Rule XI. (g) Joint Committee Reports of Investigation or Study.--A report of an investigation or study conducted jointly by more than one committee may be filed jointly, provided that each of the committees complies independently with all requirements for approval and filing of the report. II. COMMITTEE BUSINESS MEETINGS--REGULAR, ADDITIONAL AND SPECIAL (a) Regular Meetings.--Regular meetings of the Committee, in accordance with clause 2(b) of House Rule XI, shall be held on the first Wednesday of every month to transact its business if notice is given pursuant to clause 2(g)(3) of House Rule XI. The Chairman shall provide each Member of the Committee, as far in advance of the day of the regular meeting as practicable, a written agenda of such meeting. Items may be placed on the agenda by the Chairman or a majority of the Committee. (See paragraph (f) of Committee Rule XI for provisions that apply to meetings of subcommittees.) (b) Additional Meetings.--(1) The Chairman may call and convene, as he or she considers necessary, which may not commence earlier than the third calendar day (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, or legal holidays except when the House is in session on such a day) on which Members have notice thereof after consultation with the Ranking Minority Member of the Committee or after concurrence with the Ranking Minority Member, additional meetings of the Committee for the consideration of any bill or resolution pending before the Committee or for the conduct of other Committee business. The Committee shall meet for such additional meetings pursuant to the notice from the Chairman. (2) A hearing or meeting may begin sooner than specified in clause (1) (in which case, the chair shall make the announcement specified at the earliest possible time) if the Committee so determines by majority vote in the presence of the number of Members required under the Rules of the Committee for the transaction of business. (3) At least 24 hours prior to the commencement of a meeting for the markup of a measure or matter the Chair shall cause the text of such measure or matter to be made publicly available in electronic form. (c) Special Meetings.--If at least three Members of the Committee desire that a special meeting of the Committee be called by the Chairman, those Members may file in the offices of the Committee their written request to the Chairman for such special meeting. Such request shall specify the measure or matters to be considered. Immediately upon the filing of the request, the Majority Staff Director (serving as the clerk of the Committee for such purpose) shall notify the Chairman of the filing of the request. If, within 3 calendar days after the filing of the request, the Chairman does not call the requested special meeting to be held within 7 calendar days after the filing of the request, a majority of the Members of the Committee may file in the offices of the Committee their written notice that a special meeting of the Committee will be held, specifying the date and hour thereof, and the measures or matter to be considered at that special meeting in accordance with clause 2(c)(2) of House Rule XI. The Committee shall meet on that date and hour. Immediately upon the filing of the notice, the Majority Staff Director (serving as the clerk) of the Committee shall notify all Members of the Committee that such meeting will be held and inform them of its date and hour and the measure or matter to be considered, and only the measure or matter specified in that notice may be considered at that special meeting. III. OPEN MEETINGS AND HEARINGS; BROADCASTING (a) Open Meetings and Hearings.--Each meeting for the transaction of business, including the markup of legislation, and each hearing by the Committee or a Subcommittee shall be open to the public unless closed in accordance with clause 2(g) of House Rule XI. (b) Broadcasting and Photography.--Whenever a Committee or Subcommittee meeting for the transaction of business, including the markup of legislation, or a hearing is open to the public, the Committee shall: (1) to the maximum extent practicable provide audio and video coverage of each hearing or meeting for the transaction of business in a manner that allows the public to easily listen to and view the proceedings and shall maintain the recordings of such coverage in a manner that is easily accessible to the public; and (2) make each hearing or meeting for the transaction of business open to coverage by television, radio, and still photography in accordance with clause 4 of House Rule XI. When such audio and visual coverage is conducted in the Committee or Subcommittee, written notice to that effect shall be provided to each Member. The Chairman of the Committee or Subcommittee shall not limit the number of television or still cameras permitted in a hearing or meeting room to fewer than two representatives from each medium (except for legitimate space or safety considerations, in which case pool coverage shall be authorized). (c) Closed Meetings--Attendees.--No person other than Members of the Committee or Subcommittee and such congressional staff and departmental representatives as the Committee or Subcommittee may authorize shall be present at any business or markup session that has been closed to the public as provided in clause 2(g)(1) of House Rule XI. (d) Addressing the Committee.--A Committee Member may address the Committee or a Subcommittee on any bill, motion, or other matter under consideration (See Committee Rule VIII (e) relating to questioning a witness at a hearing). The time a Member may address the Committee or Subcommittee for any such purpose shall be limited to 5 minutes, except that this time limit may be waived by unanimous consent. A Member shall also be limited in his or her remarks to the subject matter under consideration, unless the Member receives unanimous consent to extend his or her remarks beyond such subject. (e) Meetings to Begin Promptly.--Subject to the presence of a quorum, each meeting or hearing of the Committee and its subcommittees shall begin promptly at the time so stipulated in the public announcement of the meeting or hearing. (f) Prohibition on Proxy Voting.--No vote by any Member of the Committee or Subcommittee with respect to any measure or matter may be cast by proxy. (g) Location of Persons at Meetings.--No person other than the Committee or Subcommittee Members and Committee or Subcommittee staff may be seated in the rostrum area during a meeting of the Committee or Subcommittee unless by unanimous consent of Committee or Subcommittee. (h) Consideration of Amendments and Motions.--A Member, upon request, shall be recognized by the Chairman to address the Committee or Subcommittee at a meeting for a period limited to 5 minutes on behalf of an amendment or motion offered by the Member or another Member, or upon any other matter under consideration, unless the Member receives unanimous consent to extend the time limit. Every amendment or motion made in Committee or Subcommittee shall, upon the demand of any Member present, be reduced to writing, and a copy thereof shall be made available to all Members present. Such amendment or motion shall not be pending before the Committee or Subcommittee or voted on until the requirements of this paragraph have been met. (i) Demanding Record Vote.-- (1) A record vote of the Committee or Subcommittee on a question or action shall be ordered on a demand by one-fifth of the Members present. (2) The Chairman of the Committee or Subcommittee may postpone further proceedings when a record vote is ordered on the question of approving a measure or matter or on adopting an amendment. If the Chairman postpones further proceedings: (A) the Chairman may resume such postponed proceedings, after giving Members adequate notice, at a time chosen in consultation with the Ranking Minority Member; and (B) notwithstanding any intervening order for the previous question, the underlying proposition on which proceedings were postponed shall remain subject to further debate or amendment to the same extent as when the question was postponed. (j) Submission of Motions or Amendments In Advance of Business Meetings.--The Committee and Subcommittee Chairman may request and Committee and Subcommittee Members should, insofar as practicable, cooperate in providing copies of proposed amendments or motions to the Chairman and the Ranking Minority Member of the Committee or the Subcommittee twenty-four hours before a Committee or Subcommittee business meeting. (k) Points of Order.--No point of order against the hearing or meeting procedures of the Committee or Subcommittee shall be entertained unless it is made in a timely fashion. (l) Limitation on Committee Sittings.--The Committee or subcommittees may not sit during a joint session of the House and Senate or during a recess when a joint meeting of the House and Senate is in progress. (m) Prohibition of Wireless Telephones.--Use of wireless phones for vocal conversation during a Committee or Subcommittee hearing or meeting is prohibited. IV. QUORUMS (a) Working Quorum.--One-third of the Members of the Committee or Subcommittee shall constitute a quorum for taking any action, other than as noted in paragraphs (b) and (c). (b) Majority Quorum.--A majority of the Members of the Committee or Subcommittee shall constitute a quorum for: (1) the reporting of a bill, resolution, or other measure (See clause 2(h)(1) of House Rule XI, and Committee Rule IX); (2) the closing of a meeting or hearing to the public pursuant to clauses 2(g), 2(k)(5), and 2(k)(7) of House Rule XI; (3) the authorizing of a subpoena as provided in clause 2(m)(3) of House Rule XI (See also Committee Rule VII); and (4) as where required by a Rule of the House. (c) Quorum for Taking Testimony.--Two Members of the Committee or Subcommittee shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of taking testimony and receiving evidence. V. RECORDS (a) Maintenance of Records.--The Committee shall keep a complete record of all Committee and Subcommittee action which shall include: (1) in the case of any meeting or hearing transcripts, a substantially verbatim account of remarks actually made during the proceedings, subject only to technical, grammatical, and typographical corrections authorized by the person making the remarks involved, and (2) written minutes, which shall include a record of all Committee and Subcommittee action, a record of all votes on any question, and a tally on all record votes. The result of each such record vote shall be made publicly available in electronic form within 48 hours of such record vote. Not later than 24 hours after adoption of an amendment, or 48 hours after the disposition or withdrawal of any other amendment, to a measure or matter, the chair of the Committee shall cause the text of such amendment adopted thereto to be made publicly available in electronic form. Information so available for public inspection shall include a description of the amendment, motion, order, or other proposition; the name of each Member voting for and each Member voting against such amendment, motion, order, or other proposition; and the names of those Members present but not voting. (b) Access to and Correction of Records.--Any public witness, or person authorized by such witness, during Committee office hours in the Committee offices and within 10 calendar days of the close of hearings, may obtain a transcript copy of that public witness's testimony and make such technical, grammatical, and typographical corrections as authorized by the person making the remarks involved as will not alter the nature of testimony given. There shall be prompt return of such corrected copy of the transcript to the Committee. Members of the Committee or Subcommittee shall receive copies of transcripts for their prompt review and correction and prompt return to the Committee. The Committee or Subcommittee may order the printing of a hearing record without the corrections of any Member or witness if it determines that such Member or witness has been afforded a reasonable time in which to make such corrections and further delay would seriously impede the consideration of the legislative action that is subject of the hearing. The record of a hearing shall be closed 10 calendar days after the last oral testimony, unless the Committee or Subcommittee determines otherwise. Any person requesting to file a statement for the record of a hearing must so request before the hearing concludes and must file the statement before the record is closed, unless the Committee or Subcommittee determines otherwise. The Committee or Subcommittee may reject any statement in light of its length or its tendency to defame, degrade, or incriminate any person. (c) Property of the House.--All Committee and Subcommittee records (including hearings data, charts, and files) shall be kept separate and distinct from the congressional office records of the Members serving as Chairman. Such records shall be the property of the House, and all Members of the House shall have access thereto. The Majority Staff Director shall promptly notify the Chairman and the Ranking Minority Member of any request for access to such records. (d) Availability of Archived Records.--The records of the Committee at the National Archives and Records Administration shall be made available for public use in accordance with House Rule VII. The Chairman shall notify the Ranking Minority Member of the Committee of the need for a Committee order pursuant to clause 3(b)(3) or clause 4(b) of such House Rule, to withhold a record otherwise available. (e) Special Rules for Certain Records and Proceedings.--A stenographic record of a business meeting of the Committee or Subcommittee may be kept, and thereafter may be published, if the Chairman of the Committee, after consultation with the Ranking Minority Member, determines there is need for such a record. The proceedings of the Committee or Subcommittee in a closed meeting, evidence or testimony in such meeting, shall not be divulged unless otherwise determined by a majority of the Committee or Subcommittee. (f) Electronic Availability of Committee Publications.--To the maximum extent feasible, the Committee shall make its publications available in electronic form. VI. POWER TO SIT AND ACT For the purpose of carrying out any of its function and duties under House Rules X and XI, the Committee and each of its subcommittees is authorized to sit and act at such times and places within the United States whether the House is in session, has recessed, or has adjourned and to hold such hearings. VII. SUBPOENAS, DEPOSITIONS, AND OATHS (a) Issuance of Subpoenas.--In accordance with clause 2(m) of House Rule XI, a subpoena may be authorized and issued by a majority of the Committee or by the Chairman in consultation with the Ranking Minority Member. Such consultation shall occur at least 48 hours in advance of a subpoena being issued under such authority. Authorized subpoenas shall be signed by the Chairman of the Committee or by any Member designated by the Committee. (b) Oaths.--The Chairman of the Committee, or any member of the Committee designated by the Chairman, may administer oaths to any witnesses. (c) Deposition Authority.-- (1) The Chairman, upon consultation with the Ranking Minority Member, may order the taking of depositions, including pursuant to subpoena, by a Member or counsel of the Committee. (2) Depositions taken under the authority prescribed in this subsection shall be subject to regulations issued by the chair of the Committee on Rules and printed in the Congressional Record. (3) The Regulations for the Use of Deposition Authority as issued by the Committee on Rules pursuant to H. Res. 5 titled--Adopting the Rules of the House of Representatives for the One Hundred Nineteenth Congress, and for other purposes--are incorporated by reference and shall be considered the rules of the Committee. VIII. HEARING PROCEDURES. (a) Power to Hear.--For the purpose of carrying out any of its functions and duties under House Rules X and XI, the Committee and its subcommittees are authorized to sit and hold hearings at any time or place within the United States whether the House is in session, has recessed, or has adjourned. (See Committee Rule VI and paragraph (f) of Committee Rule XI for provisions relating to Subcommittee hearings and meetings.) (b) Announcement.--The Chairman of the Committee shall, after consultation with the Ranking Minority Member of the Committee, make a public announcement of the date, place, and subject matter of any Committee hearing at least 1 week before the commencement of the hearing. The Chairman of a Subcommittee shall schedule a hearing only after consultation with the Chairman of the Committee and the Ranking Minority Member of the Subcommittee. After such consultation, the Chairman of the Subcommittee shall consult the Chairmen of the other subcommittees and shall request the Majority Staff Director to make a public announcement of the date, place, and subject matter of such hearing at least 1 week before the hearing. If the Chairman of the Committee or the Subcommittee, with concurrence of the Ranking Minority Member of the Committee or Subcommittee, determines there is good cause to begin the hearing sooner, or if the Committee or Subcommittee so determines by majority vote, a quorum being present for the transaction of business, the Chairman of the Committee or Subcommittee, as appropriate, shall request the Majority Staff Director to make such public announcement at the earliest possible date. The clerk of the Committee shall promptly notify the Daily Digest Clerk of the Congressional Record and shall promptly enter the appropriate information into the Committee scheduling service of the House information system as soon as possible after such public announcement is made. (c) Scheduling of Witnesses.-- (1) Except as otherwise provided in this rule, the scheduling of witnesses and determination of the time allowed for the presentation of testimony at hearings shall be at the discretion of the Chairman of the Committee or Subcommittee, unless a majority of the Committee or Subcommittee determines otherwise. (2) The Regulations for the remote participation of Committee witnesses as issued by the Committee on Rules pursuant to H. Res. 5 titled--Adopting the Rules of the House of Representatives for the One Hundred Nineteenth Congress, and for other purposes--are incorporated by reference and shall be considered the rules of the Committee. (d) Written Statement; Oral Testimony.--(1) Each witness who is to appear before the Committee or a Subcommittee, shall insofar as practicable file with the Majority Staff Director of the Committee, at least 2 working days before the day of his or her appearance, a written statement of proposed testimony. Witnesses shall provide sufficient copies of their statement for distribution to Committee or Subcommittee Members, staff, and the news media. Insofar as practicable, the Committee or Subcommittee staff shall distribute such written statements to all Members of the Committee or Subcommittee as soon as they are received, as well as any official reports from departments and agencies on such subject matter. All witnesses may be limited in their oral presentations to brief summaries of their statements within the time allotted to them at the discretion of the Chairman of the Committee or Subcommittee, in light of the nature of the testimony and the length of time available. (2) As noted in paragraph (b) of Committee Rule VII, the Chairman of the Committee, or any Member designated by the Chairman, may administer an oath to any witness. (3) In the case of a witness appearing in a non-governmental capacity, a written statement of proposed testimony shall include: (i) a curriculum vitae; (ii) a disclosure of the amount and source (by agency and program) of any Federal grant (or subgrant thereof) or contract (or subcontract thereof) received during the past 36 months by the witness or by an entity represented by the witness; (iii) a disclosure of the amount and country of origin of any payment or contract related to the subject matter of the hearing originating with a foreign government received during the past 36 months by the witness or by an entity represented by the witness; and (iv) a disclosure of whether the witness is a fiduciary (including, but not limited to, a director, officer, advisor, or resident agency) of any organization or entity that has an interest in the subject matter of the hearing. Such statements, with appropriate redactions to protect the privacy of witnesses, shall be made publicly available in electronic form 24 hours before the witness appears to the extent practicable, but not later than 1 day after the witness appears. (e) Questioning of Witnesses.--Committee or Subcommittee Members may question witnesses only when they have been recognized by the Chairman of the Committee or Subcommittee for that purpose. Each Member so recognized shall be limited to questioning a witness for 5 minutes until such time as each Member of the Committee or Subcommittee who so desires has had an opportunity to question the witness for 5 minutes; and thereafter the Chairman of the Committee or Subcommittee may limit the time of a further round of questioning after giving due consideration to the importance of the subject matter and the length of time available. All questions put to witnesses shall be germane to the measure or matter under consideration. Unless a majority of the Committee or Subcommittee determines otherwise, no Committee or Subcommittee staff shall interrogate witnesses. (f) Extended Questioning for Designated Members.--Notwithstanding paragraph (e), the Chairman and Ranking Minority Member may designate an equal number of Members from each party to question a witness for a period not longer than 60 minutes. (g) Witnesses for the Minority.--When any hearing is conducted by the Committee or any Subcommittee upon any measure or matter, the minority party Members on the Committee or Subcommittee shall be entitled, upon request to the Chairman by a majority of those minority Members before the completion of such hearing, to call witnesses selected by the minority to testify with respect to that measure or matter during at least 1 day of hearing thereon as provided in clause 2(j)(1) of House Rule XI. (h) Summary of Subject Matter.--Upon announcement of a hearing, to the extent practicable, the Committee shall make available immediately to all Members of the Committee a concise summary of the subject matter (including legislative reports and other material) under consideration. In addition, upon announcement of a hearing and subsequently as they are received, the Chairman of the Committee or Subcommittee shall, to the extent practicable, make available to the Members of the Committee any official reports from departments and agencies on such matter. (See paragraph (f) of Committee Rule XI.) (i) Open Hearings.--Each hearing conducted by the Committee or Subcommittee shall be open to the public, including radio, television, and still photography coverage, except as provided in clause 4 of House Rule XI (See also paragraph (b) of Committee Rule III.). In any event, no Member of the House may be excluded from nonparticipatory attendance at any hearing unless the House by majority vote shall authorize the Committee or Subcommittee, for purposes of a particular series of hearings on a particular bill or resolution or on a particular subject of investigation, to close its hearings to Members by means of the above procedure. (j) Hearings and Reports.--(1)(i) The Chairman of the Committee or Subcommittee at a hearing shall announce in an opening statement the subject of the investigation. A copy of the Committee Rules (and the applicable provisions of clause 2 of House Rule XI, regarding hearing procedures, an excerpt of which appears in Appendix A thereto) shall be made available to each witness upon request. Witnesses at hearings may be accompanied by their own counsel for the purpose of advising them concerning their constitutional rights. The Chairman of the Committee or Subcommittee may punish breaches of order and decorum, and of professional ethics on the part of counsel, by censure and exclusion from the hearings; but only the full Committee may cite the offender to the House for contempt. (ii) Whenever it is asserted by a Member of the Committee that the evidence or testimony at a hearing may tend to defame, degrade, or incriminate any person, or it is asserted by a witness that the evidence or testimony that the witness would give at a hearing may tend to defame, degrade, or incriminate the witness, such testimony or evidence shall be presented in executive session, notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (i) of this rule, if by a majority of those present, there being in attendance the requisite number required under the Rules of the Committee to be present for the purpose of taking testimony, the Committee or Subcommittee determines that such evidence or testimony may tend to defame, degrade, or incriminate any person. The Committee or Subcommittee shall afford a person an opportunity to voluntarily appear as a witness; and the Committee or Subcommittee shall receive and shall dispose of requests from such person to subpoena additional witnesses. (iii) No evidence or testimony taken in executive session may be released or used in public sessions without the consent of the Committee or Subcommittee. In the discretion of the Committee or Subcommittee, witnesses may submit brief and pertinent statements in writing for inclusion in the record. The Committee or Subcommittee is the sole judge of the pertinence of testimony and evidence adduced at its hearings. A witness may obtain a transcribed copy of his or her testimony given at a public session. If given at an executive session, a transcribed copy of testimony may be obtained when authorized by the Committee or Subcommittee. (See paragraph (c) of Committee Rule V.) (2) A proposed investigative or oversight report shall be considered as read if it has been available to the Members of the Committee for at least 24 hours (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, or legal holidays except when the House is in session on such day) in advance of their consideration. IX. THE REPORTING OF BILLS AND RESOLUTIONS (a) Filing of Reports.--The Chairman shall report or cause to be reported promptly to the House any bill, resolution, or other measure approved by the Committee and shall take or cause to be taken all necessary steps to bring such bill, resolution, or other measure to a vote. No bill, resolution, or measure shall be reported from the Committee unless a majority of the Committee is actually present. A Committee report on any bill, resolution, or other measure approved by the Committee shall be filed within 7 calendar days (not counting days on which the House is not in session) after the day on which there has been filed with the Majority Staff Director of the Committee a written request, signed by a majority of the Committee, for the reporting of that bill or resolution. The Majority Staff Director of the Committee shall notify the Chairman immediately when such a request is filed. (b) Content of Reports.--Each Committee report on any bill or resolution approved by the Committee shall include as separately identified sections: (1) a statement of the intent or purpose of the bill or resolution; (2) a statement describing the need for such bill or resolution; (3) a statement of Committee and Subcommittee consideration of the measure, including a summary of amendments and motions offered and the actions taken thereon; (4) the results of each record vote on any amendment in the Committee and Subcommittee and on the motion to report the measure or matter, including the total number of votes cast for and against, and the names of Members voting for and against such amendment or motion (See clause 3(b) of House Rule XIII); (5) the oversight findings and recommendations of the Committee with respect to the subject matter of the bill or resolution, as required pursuant to clause 3(c)(1) of House Rule XIII and clause 2(b)(1) of House Rule X; (6) the detailed statement described in House Rule XIII clause 3(c)(2) and section 308(a) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 if the bill or resolution provides new budget authority (other than continuing appropriations), new spending authority described in section 401(c)(2) of such Act, new credit authority, or an increase or decrease in revenues or tax expenditures, except that the estimates with respect to new budget authority shall include, when practicable, a comparison of the total estimated funding level for the relevant program (or programs) to the appropriate levels under current law; (7) the estimate of costs and comparison of such estimates, if any, prepared by the Director of the Congressional Budget Office in connection with such bill or resolution pursuant to section 402 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 if submitted in timely fashion to the Committee; (8) a statement of general performance goals and objectives, including outcome-related goals and objectives, for which the measure authorizes funding; (9) an estimate by the Committee of the costs that would be incurred in carrying out the bill or joint resolution in the fiscal year in which it is reported and in each of the five fiscal years following that fiscal year (or for the authorized duration of any program authorized by the bill or joint resolution if less than five years) (see clause 3(d)(1) of House Rule XIII), together with-(i) a comparison of these estimates with those made and submitted to the Committee by any Government agency when practicable and (ii) a comparison of the total estimated funding level for the relevant program (or programs) with appropriate levels under current law (The provisions of this clause do not apply if a cost estimate and comparison prepared by the Director of the Congressional Budget Office under section 402 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 has been timely submitted prior to the filing of the report and included in the report); (10) a list of congressional earmarks, limited tax benefits, and limited tariff benefits in the bill or in the report (and the name of any Member, Delegate, or Resident Commissioner who submitted a request to the Committee for each respective item included in such list) or a statement that the proposition contains no congressional earmarks, limited tax benefits, or limited tariff benefits; (11) the changes in existing law (if any) shown in accordance with clause 3 of House Rule XIII; (12) the determination required pursuant to section 5(b) of P.L. 92- 463, if the legislation reported establishes or authorizes the establishment of an advisory committee; (13) the information on Federal and intergovernmental mandates required by section 423(c) and (d) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974, as added by the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act of 1995 (P.L. 104- 4); (14) a statement regarding the applicability of section 102(b)(3) of the Congressional Accountability Act (P.L. 104-1); (15) a statement indicating whether any provision of the measure establishes or reauthorizes a program of the Federal Government known to be duplicative of another Federal program. The Statement shall at a minimum explain whether-- (A) any such program was included in any report from the Government Accountability Office to Congress pursuant to section 21 of P.L. 111- 139; or (B) the most recent catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance, published pursuant to the Federal Program Information Act (P.L. 95- 220, as amended by P. L. 98-169), identified other programs related to the program established or reauthorized by the measure; and (16) a statement estimating the number of directed rule makings required by the measure. (c) Supplemental, Minority, Additional, or Dissenting Views.--If, at the time of approval of any measure or matter by the Committee, any Member of the Committee gives notice of intention to file supplemental, minority, additional, or dissenting views (including in electronic form), all Members shall be entitled to not less than 2 subsequent calendar days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays except when the House is in session on such date) in which to file such written and signed views with the Clerk of the Committee. When time guaranteed by this paragraph has expired (or, if sooner, when all separate views have been received), the Committee may arrange to file its report with the Clerk of the House not later than 1 hour after the expiration of such time. All such views (in accordance with clause 2(l) of House Rule XI and clause 3(a)(1) of House Rule XIII), as filed by one or more Members of the Committee, shall be included within and made a part of the report filed by the Committee with respect to that bill or resolution. (d) Printing of Reports.--The report of the Committee on the measure or matter noted in paragraph (a) above shall be printed in a single volume, which shall: (1) include all supplemental, minority, additional, or dissenting views that have been submitted by the time of the filing of the report; and (2) bear on its cover a recital that any such supplemental, minority, additional, or dissenting views (and any material submitted under clause 3(a)(1) of House Rule XII) are included as part of the report. (e) Immediate Printing; Supplemental Reports.--Nothing in this rule shall preclude-- (1) the immediate filing or printing of a Committee report unless timely request for the opportunity to file supplemental, minority, additional, or dissenting views has been made as provided by paragraph (c); or (2) the filing by the Committee of any supplemental report on any bill or resolution that may be required for the correction of any technical error in a previous report made by the Committee on that bill or resolution. (f) Availability of Printed Hearing Records.--For hearings held related to any reported bill or resolution, the Committee shall make every reasonable effort to have the record of such hearings printed and available for distribution to the Members of the House prior to the consideration of such bill or resolution by the House. Each printed hearing of the Committee or any of its subcommittees shall include a record of the attendance of the Members. (g) Committee Prints.--All Committee or Subcommittee prints or other Committee or Subcommittee documents, other than reports or prints of bills, that are prepared for public distribution shall be approved by the Chairman of the Committee or the Committee prior to public distribution. (h) Post Adjournment Filing of Committee Reports.--(1) After an adjournment of the last regular session of a Congress sine die, an investigative or oversight report approved by the Committee may be filed with the Clerk at any time, provided that if a Member gives notice at the time of approval of intention to file supplemental, minority, additional, or dissenting views, that Member shall be entitled to not less than 7 calendar days in which to submit such views for inclusion with the report. (2) After an adjournment of the last regular session of a Congress sine die, the Chairman of the Committee may file at any time with the Clerk the Committee's activity report for that Congress pursuant to clause 1(d)(1) of House Rule XI without the approval of the Committee, provided that a copy of the report has been available to each Member of the Committee for at least 7 calendar days and the report includes any supplemental, minority, additional, or dissenting views submitted by a Member of the Committee. (3) All reports of committees may be delivered to the Clerk in electronic form. (i) Conference.--The Chairman is directed to offer a motion under clause 1 of House Rule XXII whenever the Chairman considers it appropriate. X. OTHER COMMITTEE ACTIVITIES (a) Authorization and Oversight Plan.-- (1) Not later than March 1 of the first session of a Congress, the Committee shall, in consultation with the Ranking Member, in a meeting that is open to the public, adopt its authorization and oversight plan for that Congress. Such plan shall be submitted simultaneously to the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform and the Committee on House Administration. (2) Each such plan shall include, with respect to programs and agencies within the committee's jurisdiction, and to the maximum extent practicable-- (A) a list of such programs or agencies with lapsed authorizations that received funding in the prior fiscal year or, in the case of a program or agency with a permanent authorization, which has not been subject to a comprehensive review by the committee in the prior three Congresses; (B) a description of each such program or agency to be authorized in the current Congress; (C) a description of each such program or agency to be authorized in the next Congress, if applicable; (D) a description of any oversight to support the authorization of each such program or agency in the current Congress; and (E) recommendations for changes to existing law for moving such programs or agencies from mandatory funding to discretionary appropriations, where appropriate. (3) Each such plan may include, with respect to the programs and agencies within the Committee's jurisdiction--- (A) recommendations for the consolidation or termination of such programs or agencies that are duplicative, unnecessary, or inconsistent with the appropriate roles and responsibilities of the Federal Government; (B) recommendations for changes to existing law related to Federal rules, regulations, statutes, and court decisions affecting such programs and agencies that are inconsistent with the authorities of the Congress under Article I of the Constitution; and (C) a description of such other oversight activities as the committee may consider necessary. (4) In the development of such plan, the Chairman shall coordinate with other committees of jurisdiction to ensure that programs and agencies are subject to routine, comprehensive authorization efforts. (5) The Committee and its appropriate subcommittees shall review and study, on a continuing basis, the impact or probable impact of tax policies affecting subjects within its jurisdiction as provided in clause 2(c) of House Rule X. (b) Annual Appropriations.--The Committee shall, in its consideration of all bills and joint resolutions of a public character within its jurisdiction, ensure that appropriations for continuing programs and activities of the Federal government and the District of Columbia government will be made annually to the maximum extent feasible and consistent with the nature, requirements, and objectives of the programs and activities involved. The Committee shall review, from time to time, each continuing program within its jurisdiction for which appropriations are not made annually in order to ascertain whether such program could be modified so that appropriations therefor would be made annually. (c) Budget Act Compliance: Views and Estimates (See Appendix B).--Not later than 6 weeks after the President submits his budget under section 1105(a) of Title 31, United States Code, or at such time as the Committee on the Budget may request, the Committee shall, submit to the Committee on the Budget (1) its views and estimates with respect to all matters to be set forth in the concurrent resolution on the budget for the ensuing fiscal year (under section 301 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974) that are within its jurisdiction or functions; and (2) an estimate of the total amounts of new budget authority, and budget outlays resulting therefrom, to be provided or authorized in all bills and resolutions within its jurisdiction that it intends to be effective during that fiscal year. (d) Budget Act Compliance: Recommended Changes.--Whenever the Committee is directed in a concurrent resolution on the budget to determine and recommend changes in laws, bills, or resolutions under the reconciliation process, it shall promptly make such determination and recommendations and report a reconciliation bill or resolution (or both) to the House or submit such recommendations to the Committee on the Budget, in accordance with the Congressional Budget Act of 1974. (e) Conference Committees.--Whenever in the legislative process it becomes necessary to appoint conferees, the Chairman shall, after consultation with the Ranking Minority Member, determine the number of conferees the Chairman deems most suitable and then recommend to the Speaker as conferees, in keeping with the number to be appointed by the Speaker as provided in clause 11 of House Rule I, the names of those Members of the Committee of not less than a majority who generally supported the House position and who were primarily responsible for the legislation. The Chairman shall, to the fullest extent feasible, include those Members of the Committee who were the principal proponents of the major provisions of the bill as it passed the House and such other Committee Members of the majority party as the Chairman may designate in consultation with the Members of the majority party. Such recommendations shall provide a ratio of majority party Members to minority party Members no less favorable to the majority party than the ratio of majority party Members to minority party Members on the Committee. In making recommendations of Minority Party Members as conferees, the Chairman shall consult with the Ranking Minority Member of the Committee. (f) Hearing on Waste, Fraud, and Abuse.--(1) The Committee, or a Subcommittee, shall hold at least one hearing during each 120-day period following the establishment of the Committee on the topic of waste, fraud, abuse, or mismanagement in Government programs which the Committee may authorize. (2) A hearing described in subparagraph (1) shall include a focus on the most egregious instances of waste, fraud, abuse, or mismanagement as documented by any report the Committee has received from a Federal Office of the Inspector General or the Comptroller General of the United States. (g) Hearing on Agency Financial Statements.--The Committee or a Subcommittee, shall hold at least one hearing in any session in which the Committee has received disclaimers of agency financial statements from auditors of any Federal agency that the Committee may authorize to hear testimony on such disclaimers from representatives of any such agency. (h) Hearing on GAO High-Risk-List.--The Committee or a Subcommittee, shall hold at least one hearing on issues raised by reports issued by the Comptroller General of the United States indicating that Federal programs or operations that the Committee may authorize are at high risk for waste, fraud, and mismanagement, known as the `high-risk-list' or the `high-risk series'. (i) Member Day Hearing.--During the first session of a Congress, the Committee will hold a hearing at which it receives testimony from Members, Delegates, and the Resident Commissioner on proposed legislation within its jurisdiction. (j) Activities Report.--(1) Not later than January 2 of each odd- numbered year, the Committee shall submit to the House a report on the activities of the Committee. After adjournment sine die of the last regular session of a Congress, or after December 15 of an even-numbered year, whichever occurs first, the Chair may file the report, a copy of which shall be made available to each Member of the Committee for at least 7 calendar days, with the Clerk of the House at any time. (2) Such report shall include separate sections summarizing the legislative and oversight activities of the Committee during that Congress. (3) The oversight section of such report shall include a summary of the oversight plans submitted by the Committee pursuant to clause 2(d) of House Rule X, a summary of the actions taken and recommendations made with respect to each such plan, and a summary of any additional oversight activities undertaken by the Committee, and any recommendations made or actions taken with respect thereto. XI. SUBCOMMITTEES (a) Number and Composition.--There shall be such subcommittees as specified in paragraph (c) of this rule. Each of such subcommittees shall be composed of the number of Members set forth in paragraph (c) of this rule, including ex officio Members.\1\ The Chairman may create additional subcommittees of an ad hoc nature as the Chairman determines to be appropriate, subject to any limitations provided for in the House Rules. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \1\ The Chairman and Ranking Minority Member of the Committee serve as ex officio Members of the Subcommittees. (See paragraph (e) of this Rule). --------------------------------------------------------------------------- (b) Ratios.--On each Subcommittee, there shall be a ratio of majority party Members to minority party Members which shall be consistent with the ratio on the full Committee. In calculating the ratio of majority party Members to minority party Members, there shall be included the ex officio Members of the subcommittees and ratios below reflect that fact. (c) Jurisdiction.--Each Subcommittee shall have the following general jurisdiction and number of Members: General Farm Commodities, Risk Management, and Credit (27 members, 15 majority and 12 minority).--Policies, statutes, and markets relating to commodities including barley, cotton, cottonseed, corn, grain sorghum, honey, mohair, oats, other oilseeds, peanuts, pulse crops, rice, soybeans, sugar, wheat, and wool; the Commodity Credit Corporation; risk management policies and statutes, including Federal Crop Insurance; producer data and privacy issues; agricultural credit; and related oversight of such issues. Forestry and Horticulture (15 members, 8 majority and 7 minority).-- Policies and statutes relating to forestry and all forests under the jurisdiction of the Committee on Agriculture; regulatory issues impacting national forests; policies, statutes, and markets relating to horticulture, including fruits, vegetables, nuts, and ornamentals; bees; and organic agriculture; and related oversight of such issues. Conservation, Research, and Biotechnology (21 members, 11 majority and 10 minority).--Policies and statutes related to resource conservation; pest and disease management, including pesticides; bioterrorism; adulteration and quarantine matters; research, education, and extension; biotechnology; and related oversight of such issues. Nutrition and Foreign Agriculture (23 members, 12 majority and 11 minority).--Policies and statutes relating to marketing and promotion orders; policies and statutes relating to nutrition, including the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program and domestic commodity distribution and consumer initiative; policies and statutes related to foreign agricultural assistance and trade promotion; and related oversight of such issues. Livestock, Dairy, and Poultry (29 members, 15 majority and 14 minority).--Policies, statutes, and markets relating to all livestock, poultry, dairy, and seafood, including all products thereof; the inspection, marketing, and promotion of such commodities and products; aquaculture; animal welfare; grazing; and related oversight of such issues. Commodity Markets, Digital Assets, and Rural Development (25 members, 13 majority and 12 minority).--Policies, statutes, and markets relating to commodity exchanges; rural development; energy; rural electrification; and related oversight of such issues. (d) Referral of Legislation.-- (1)(a) In general.--All bills, resolutions, and other matters referred to the Committee shall be referred to all subcommittees of appropriate jurisdiction within 2 weeks after being referred to the Committee. After consultation with the Ranking Minority Member, the Chairman may determine that the Committee will consider certain bills, resolutions, or other matters. (b) Trade Matters.--Unless action is otherwise taken under subparagraph (3), bills, resolutions, and other matters referred to the Committee relating to foreign agriculture, foreign food or commodity assistance, and foreign trade and marketing issues will be considered by the Committee. (2) The Chairman, by a majority vote of the Committee, may discharge a Subcommittee from further consideration of any bill, resolution, or other matter referred to the Subcommittee and have such bill, resolution, or other matter considered by the Committee. The Committee having referred a bill, resolution, or other matter to a Subcommittee in accordance with this rule may discharge such Subcommittee from further consideration thereof at any time by a vote of the majority Members of the Committee for the Committee's direct consideration or for reference to another Subcommittee. (3) Unless the Committee, a quorum being present, decides otherwise by a majority vote, the Chairman may refer bills, resolutions, legislation, or other matters not specifically within the jurisdiction of a Subcommittee, or that is within the jurisdiction of more than one Subcommittee, jointly or exclusively as the Chairman deems appropriate, including concurrently to the subcommittees with jurisdiction, sequentially to the subcommittees with jurisdiction (subject to any time limits deemed appropriate), divided by subject matter among the subcommittees with jurisdiction, or to an ad hoc subcommittee appointed by the Chairman for the purpose of considering the matter and reporting to the Committee thereon, or make such other provisions deemed appropriate. (e) Participation and Service of Committee Members on Subcommittees.-- (1) The Chairman and the Ranking Minority Member shall serve as ex officio Members of all subcommittees and shall have the right to vote on all matters before the subcommittees. The Chairman and the Ranking Minority Member may not be counted for the purpose of establishing a quorum. (2) Any Member of the Committee who is not a Member of the Subcommittee may have the privilege of sitting and nonparticipatory attendance at Subcommittee hearings or meetings in accordance with clause 2(g)(2) of House Rule XI. Such Member may not: (i) vote on any matter; (ii) be counted for the purpose of a establishing a quorum; (iii) participate in questioning a witness under the 5-Minute Rule, unless permitted to do so by the Subcommittee Chairman in consultation with the Ranking Minority Member or a majority of the Subcommittee, a quorum being present; (iv) raise points of order; or (v) offer amendments or motions. (f) Subcommittee Hearings and Meetings.--(1) Each Subcommittee is authorized to meet, hold hearings, receive evidence, and make recommendations to the Committee on all matters referred to it or under its jurisdiction after consultation by the Subcommittee Chairman with the Committee Chairman. (See Committee Rule VIII.) (2) After consultation with the Committee Chairman, Subcommittee Chairmen shall set dates for hearings and meetings of their subcommittees and shall request the Majority Staff Director to make any announcement relating thereto. (See paragraph (b) of Committee Rule VIII.) In setting the dates, the Committee Chairman and Subcommittee Chairman shall consult with other Subcommittee Chairmen and relevant Committee and Subcommittee Ranking Minority Members in an effort to avoid simultaneously scheduling Committee and Subcommittee meetings or hearings to the extent practicable. (3) Notice of all Subcommittee meetings shall be provided to the Chairman and the Ranking Minority Member of the Committee by the Majority Staff Director. (4) Subcommittees may hold meetings or hearings outside of the House if the Chairman of the Committee and other Subcommittee Chairmen and the Ranking Minority Member of the Subcommittee is consulted in advance to ensure that there is no scheduling problem. However, the majority of the Committee may authorize such meeting or hearing. (5) The provisions regarding notice and the agenda of Committee meetings under paragraph (a) of Committee Rule II and special or additional meetings under paragraph (b) of Committee Rule II shall apply to Subcommittee meetings. (6) If a vacancy occurs in a Subcommittee chairmanship, the Chairman may set the dates for hearings and meetings of the Subcommittee during the period of vacancy. The Chairman may also appoint an acting Subcommittee Chairman until the vacancy is filled. (g) Subcommittee Action.--(1) Any bill, resolution, recommendation, or other matter forwarded to the Committee by a Subcommittee shall be promptly forwarded by the Subcommittee Chairman or any Subcommittee Member authorized to do so by the Subcommittee. (2) Upon receipt of such recommendation, the Majority Staff Director of the Committee shall promptly advise all Members of the Committee of the Subcommittee action. (3) The Committee shall not consider any matters recommended by subcommittees until 2 calendar days have elapsed from the date of action, unless the Chairman or a majority of the Committee determines otherwise. (h) Subcommittee Investigations.--No investigation shall be initiated by a Subcommittee without prior consultation with the Chairman of the Committee or a majority of the Committee. XII. COMMITTEE BUDGET, STAFF, AND TRAVEL (a) Committee Budget.--The Chairman, in consultation with the majority Members of the Committee and the minority Members of the Committee, shall prepare a preliminary budget for each session of the Congress. Such budget shall include necessary amounts for staff personnel, travel, investigation, and other expenses of the Committee and subcommittees. After consultation with the Ranking Minority Member, the Chairman shall include an amount budgeted to minority Members for staff under their direction and supervision. Thereafter, the Chairman shall combine such proposals into a consolidated Committee budget and shall take whatever action is necessary to have such budget duly authorized by the House. (b) Committee Staff.--(1) The Chairman shall appoint and determine the remuneration of, and may remove, the professional and clerical employees of the Committee not assigned to the minority. The professional and clerical staff of the Committee not assigned to the minority shall be under the general supervision and direction of the Chairman, who shall establish and assign the duties and responsibilities of such staff members and delegate such authority as he or she determines appropriate. (See clause 9 of House Rule X) (2) The Ranking Minority Member of the Committee shall appoint and determine the remuneration of, and may remove, the professional and clerical staff assigned to the minority within the budget approved for such purposes. The professional and clerical staff assigned to the minority shall be under the general supervision and direction of the Ranking Minority Member of the Committee who may delegate such authority as he or she determines appropriate. (3) From the funds made available for the appointment of Committee staff pursuant to any primary or additional expense resolution, the Chairman shall ensure that each Subcommittee is adequately funded and staffed to discharge its responsibilities and that the minority party is fairly treated in the appointment of such staff (See clause 6(d) of House Rule X). (c) Committee Travel.--(1) Consistent with the primary expense resolution and such additional expense resolution as may have been approved, the provisions of this rule shall govern official travel of Committee Members and Committee staff regarding domestic and foreign travel (See clause 8 of House Rule X). Official travel for any Member or any Committee staff member shall be paid only upon the prior authorization of the Chairman. Official travel may be authorized by the Chairman for any Committee Member and any Committee staff member in connection with the attendance of hearings conducted by the Committee and its subcommittees and meetings, conferences, facility inspections, and investigations which involve activities or subject matter relevant to the general jurisdiction of the Committee. Before such authorization is given there shall be submitted to the Chairman in writing the following: (i) The purpose of the official travel; (ii) The dates during which the official travel is to be made and the date or dates of the event for which the official travel is being made; (iii) The location of the event for which the official travel is to be made; and (iv) The names of Members and Committee staff seeking authorization. (2) In the case of official travel of Members and staff of a Subcommittee to hearings, meetings, conferences, facility inspections, and investigations involving activities or subject matter under the jurisdiction of such Subcommittee to be paid for out of funds allocated to the Committee, prior authorization must be obtained from the Subcommittee Chairman and the full Committee Chairman. Such prior authorization shall be given by the Chairman only upon the representation by the applicable Subcommittee Chairman in writing setting forth those items enumerated in clause (1). (3) Within 60 days of the conclusion of any official travel authorized under this rule, there shall be submitted to the Committee Chairman a written report covering the information gained as a result of the hearing, meeting, conference, facility inspection, or investigation attended pursuant to such official travel. (4) Local currencies owned by the United States shall be made available to the Committee and its employees engaged in carrying out their official duties outside the United States, its territories or possessions. No appropriated funds shall be expended for the purpose of defraying expenses of Members of the Committee or its employees in any country where local currencies are available for this purpose, and the following conditions shall apply with respect to their use of such currencies; (i) No Member or employee of the Committee shall receive or expend local currencies for subsistence in any country at a rate in excess of the maximum per diem rate set forth in applicable Federal law; and (ii) Each Member or employee of the Committee shall make an itemized report to the Chairman within 60 days following the completion of travel showing the dates each country was visited, the amount of per diem furnished, the cost of transportation furnished, and any funds expended for any other official purpose, and shall summarize in these categories the total foreign currencies and appropriated funds expended. All such individual reports shall be filed by the Chairman with the Committee on House Administration and shall be open to public inspection. XIII. AMENDMENT OF RULES These Rules may be amended by a majority vote of the Committee. A proposed change in these Rules shall not be considered by the Committee as provided in clause 2 of House Rule XI, unless written notice of the proposed change has been provided to each Committee Member 2 legislative days in advance of the date on which the matter is to be considered. Any such change in the Rules of the Committee shall be published in the Congressional Record within 30 calendar days after its approval. Appendix A EXCERPTS OF THE RULES OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES FOR THE 119TH CONGRESS PERTAINING TO COMMITTEE FUNCTIONS Rule VII Records of the House Archiving 1. (a) At the end of each Congress, the chair of each committee shall transfer to the Clerk any noncurrent records of such committee, including the subcommittees thereof. (b) At the end of each Congress, each officer of the House elected under rule II shall transfer to the Clerk any noncurrent records made or acquired in the course of the duties of such officer. 2. The Clerk shall deliver the records transferred under clause 1, together with any other noncurrent records of the House, to the Archivist of the United States for preservation at the National Archives and Records Administration. Records so delivered are the permanent property of the House and remain subject to this rule and any order of the House. Public availability 3. (a) The Clerk shall authorize the Archivist to make records delivered under clause 2 available for public use, subject to clause 4(b) and any order of the House. (b)(1) A record shall immediately be made available if it was previously made available for public use by the House or a committee or a subcommittee. (2) An investigative record that contains personal data relating to a specific living person (the disclosure of which would be an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy), an administrative record relating to personnel, or a record relating to a hearing that was closed under clause 2(g)(2) of rule XI shall be made available if it has been in existence for 50 years. (3) A record for which a time, schedule, or condition for availability is specified by order of the House shall be made available in accordance with that order. Except as otherwise provided by order of the House, a record of a committee for which a time, schedule, or condition for availability is specified by order of the committee (entered during the Congress in which the record is made or acquired by the committee) shall be made available in accordance with the order of the committee. (4) A record (other than a record referred to in subparagraph (1), (2), or (3)) shall be made available if it has been in existence for 30 years. 4. (a) A record may not be made available for public use under clause 3 if the Clerk determines that such availability would be detrimental to the public interest or inconsistent with the rights and privileges of the House. The Clerk shall notify in writing the chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on House Administration of any such determination. (b) A determination of the Clerk under paragraph (a) is subject to later orders of the House and, in the case of a record of a committee, later orders of the committee. 5. (a) This rule does not supersede rule VIII or clause 11 of rule X and does not authorize the public disclosure of any record if such disclosure is prohibited by law or executive order of the President. * * * * * (c) A committee may withdraw from the National Archives and Records Administration any record of the committee delivered to the Archivist under this rule. Such a withdrawal shall be on a temporary basis and for official use of the committee. * * * * * Rule X Organization of Committees Committees and their legislative jurisdictions 1. There shall be in the House the following standing committees, each of which shall have the jurisdiction and related functions assigned by this clause and clauses 2, 3, and 4. All bills, resolutions, and other matters relating to subjects within the jurisdiction of the standing committees listed in this clause shall be referred to those committees, in accordance with clause 2 of rule XII, as follows: (a) Committee on Agriculture. (1) Adulteration of seeds, insect pests, and protection of birds and animals in forest reserves. (2) Agriculture generally. (3) Agricultural and industrial chemistry. (4) Agricultural colleges and experiment stations. (5) Agricultural economics and research. (6) Agricultural education extension services. (7) Agricultural production and marketing and stabilization of prices of agricultural products, and commodities (not including distribution outside of the United States). (8) Animal industry and diseases of animals. (9) Commodity exchanges. (10) Crop insurance and soil conservation. (11) Dairy industry. (12) Entomology and plant quarantine. (13) Extension of farm credit and farm security. (14) Inspection of livestock, poultry, meat products, and seafood and seafood products. (15) Forestry in general and forest reserves other than those created from the public domain. (16) Human nutrition and home economics. (17) Plant industry, soils, and agricultural engineering. (18) Rural electrification. (19) Rural development. (20) Water conservation related to activities of the Department of Agriculture. * * * * * General oversight responsibilities 2. (a) The various standing committees shall have general oversight responsibilities as provided in paragraph (b) in order to assist the House in-- (1) its analysis, appraisal, and evaluation of-- (A) the application, administration, execution, and effectiveness of Federal laws; and (B) conditions and circumstances that may indicate the necessity or desirability of enacting new or additional legislation; and (2) its formulation, consideration, and enactment of changes in Federal laws, and of such additional legislation as may be necessary or appropriate. (b)(1) In order to determine whether laws and programs addressing subjects within the jurisdiction of a committee are being implemented and carried out in accordance with the intent of Congress and whether they should be continued, curtailed, or eliminated, each standing committee (other than the Committee on Appropriations) shall review and study on a continuing basis-- (A) the application, administration, execution, and effectiveness of laws and programs addressing subjects within its jurisdiction; (B) the organization and operation of Federal agencies and entities having responsibilities for the administration and execution of laws and programs addressing subjects within its jurisdiction; (C) any conditions or circumstances that may indicate the necessity or desirability of enacting new or additional legislation addressing subjects within its jurisdiction (whether or not a bill or resolution has been introduced with respect thereto); and (D) future research and forecasting on subjects within its jurisdiction. (2) Each committee to which subparagraph (1) applies having more than 20 members shall establish an oversight subcommittee, or require its subcommittees to conduct oversight in their respective jurisdictions, to assist in carrying out its responsibilities under this clause. The establishment of an oversight subcommittee does not limit the responsibility of a subcommittee with legislative jurisdiction in carrying out its oversight responsibilities. (c) Each standing committee shall review and study on a continuing basis the impact or probable impact of tax policies affecting subjects within its jurisdiction as described in clauses 1 and 3. (d)(1) Not later than March 1 of the first session of a Congress, each standing committee (other than the Committee on Appropriations, the Committee on Ethics, and the Committee on Rules) shall, in a meeting that is open to the public, adopt its authorization and oversight plan for that Congress. Such plan shall be submitted simultaneously to the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform and the Committee on House Administration. (2) Each such plan shall include, with respect to programs and agencies within the Committee's jurisdiction, and to the maximum extent practicable-- (A) a list of such programs or agencies with lapsed authorizations that received funding in the prior fiscal year or, in the case of a program or agency with a permanent authorization, which has not been subject to a comprehensive review by the committee in the prior three Congresses; (B) a description of each such program or agency to be authorized in the current Congress; (C) a description of each such program or agency to be authorized in the next Congress, if applicable; (D) a description of any oversight to support the authorization of each such program or agency in the current Congress; and (E) recommendations for changes to existing law for moving such programs or agencies from mandatory funding to discretionary appropriations, where appropriate. (3) Each such plan may include, with respect to the programs and agencies within the committee's jurisdiction-- (A) recommendations for the consolidation or termination of such programs or agencies that are duplicative, unnecessary, or inconsistent with appropriate roles and responsibilities of the Federal Government; (B) recommendations for changes to existing law related to Federal rules, regulations, statutes, and court decisions affecting such programs and agencies that are inconsistent with the authorities of the Congress under Article I of the Constitution; and (C) a description of such other oversight activities as the committee may consider necessary. (4) In the development of such plan, the chair of each committee shall coordinate with other committees of jurisdiction to ensure that programs and agencies are subject to routine, comprehensive authorization efforts. (5) Not later than April 15 in the first session of a Congress, after consultation with the Speaker, the Majority Leader, and the Minority Leader, the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform shall report to the House the authorization and oversight plans submitted under subparagraph (1) together with any recommendations that it, or the House leadership group described above, may make to ensure the most effective coordination of authorization and oversight plans and otherwise to achieve the objectives of this clause. (e) The Speaker, with the approval of the House, may appoint special ad hoc oversight committees for the purpose of reviewing specific matters within the jurisdiction of two or more standing committees. Special oversight functions 3. (a) The Committee on Appropriations shall conduct such studies and examinations of the organization and operation of executive departments and other executive agencies (including an agency the majority of the stock of which is owned by the United States) as it considers necessary to assist it in the determination of matters within its jurisdiction. (b) The Committee on Armed Services shall review and study on a continuing basis laws, programs, and Government activities relating to international arms control and disarmament and the education of military dependents in schools. (c) The Committee on the Budget shall study on a continuing basis the effect on budget outlays of relevant existing and proposed legislation and report the results of such studies to the House on a recurring basis. (d) The Committee on Education and Workforce shall review, study, and coordinate on a continuing basis laws, programs, and Government activities relating to domestic educational programs and institutions and programs of student assistance within the jurisdiction of other committees. (e) The Committee on Energy and Commerce shall review and study on a continuing basis laws, programs, and Government activities relating to nuclear and other energy and nonmilitary nuclear energy research and development including the disposal of nuclear waste. (f) The Committee on Foreign Affairs shall review and study on a continuing basis laws, programs, and Government activities relating to customs administration, intelligence activities relating to foreign policy, international financial and monetary organizations, and international fishing agreements. (g)(1) The Committee on Homeland Security shall review and study on a continuing basis all Government activities relating to homeland security, including the interaction of all departments and agencies with the Department of Homeland Security. (2) In addition, the committee shall review and study on a primary and continuing basis all Government activities, programs and organizations related to homeland security that fall within its primary legislative jurisdiction. (h) The Committee on Natural Resources shall review and study on a continuing basis laws, programs, and Government activities relating to Native Americans. (i) The Committee on Oversight and Government Reform shall review and study on a continuing basis the operation of Government activities at all levels, including the Executive Office of the President. (j) The Committee on Rules shall review and study on a continuing basis the congressional budget process, and the committee shall report its findings and recommendations to the House from time to time. (k) The Committee on Science, Space, and Technology shall review and study on a continuing basis laws, programs, and Government activities relating to nonmilitary research and development. (l) The Committee on Small Business shall study and investigate on a continuing basis the problems of all types of small business. (m) The Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence shall review and study on a continuing basis laws, programs, and activities of the intelligence community and shall review and study on an exclusive basis the sources and methods of entities described in clause 11(b)(1)(A). Additional functions of committees 4. (a)(1)(A) The Committee on Appropriations shall, within 30 days after the transmittal of the Budget to Congress each year, hold hearings on the Budget as a whole with particular reference to-- (i) the basic recommendations and budgetary policies of the President in the presentation of the Budget; and (ii) the fiscal, financial, and economic assumptions used as bases in arriving at total estimated expenditures and receipts. * * * * * (2) Pursuant to section 401(b)(2) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974, when a committee reports a bill or joint resolution that provides new entitlement authority as defined in section 3(9) of that Act, and enactment of the bill or joint resolution, as reported, would cause a breach of the committee's pertinent allocation of new  authority under section 302(a) of that Act, the bill or joint resolution may be referred to the Committee on Appropriations with instructions to report it with recommendations (which may include an amendment limiting the total amount of new entitlement authority provided in the bill or joint resolution). If the Committee on Appropriations fails to report a bill or joint resolution so referred within 15 calendar days (not counting any day on which the House is not in session), the committee automatically shall be discharged from consideration of the bill or joint resolution, and the bill or joint resolution shall be placed on the appropriate calendar. (3) In addition, the Committee on Appropriations shall study on a continuing basis those provisions of law that (on the first day of the first fiscal year for which the congressional budget process is effective) provide spending authority or permanent budget authority and shall report to the House from time to time its recommendations for terminating or modifying such provisions. (4) In the manner provided by section 302 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974, the Committee on Appropriations (after consulting with the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate) shall subdivide any allocations made to it in the joint explanatory statement accompanying the conference report on such concurrent resolution, and promptly report the subdivisions to the House as soon as practicable after a concurrent resolution on the budget for a fiscal year is agreed to. (b) The Committee on the Budget shall-- (1) review on a continuing basis the conduct by the Congressional Budget Office of its functions and duties; (2) hold hearings and receive testimony from Members, Senators, Delegates, the Resident Commissioner, and such appropriate representatives of Federal departments and agencies, the general public, and national organizations as it considers desirable in developing concurrent resolutions on the budget for each fiscal year; (3) make all reports required of it by the Congressional Budget Act of 1974; (4) study on a continuing basis those provisions of law that exempt Federal agencies or any of their activities or outlays from inclusion in the Budget of the United States Government, and report to the House from time to time its recommendations for terminating or modifying such provisions; (5) study on a continuing basis proposals designed to improve and facilitate the congressional budget process, and report to the House from time to time the results of such studies, together with its recommendations; and (6) request and evaluate continuing studies of tax expenditures, devise methods of coordinating tax expenditures, policies, and programs with direct budget outlays, and report the results of such studies to the House on a recurring basis. (c)(1) The Committee on Oversight and Government Reform shall-- (A) receive and examine reports of the Comptroller General of the United States and submit to the House such recommendations as it considers necessary or desirable in connection with the subject matter of the reports; (B) evaluate the effects of laws enacted to reorganize the legislative and executive branches of the Government; and (C) study intergovernmental relationships between the United States and the States and municipalities and between the United States and international organizations of which the United States is a member. (2) In addition to its duties under subparagraph (1), the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform may at any time conduct investigations of any matter without regard to clause 1, 2, 3, or this clause conferring jurisdiction over the matter to another standing committee. The findings and recommendations of the committee in such an investigation shall be made available to any other standing committee having jurisdiction over the matter involved. * * * * * (e)(1) Each standing committee shall, in its consideration of all public bills and public joint resolutions within its jurisdiction, ensure that appropriations for continuing programs and activities of the Federal Government and the government of the District of Columbia will be made annually to the maximum extent feasible and consistent with the nature, requirement, and objective of the programs and activities involved. In this subparagraph programs and activities of the Federal Government and the government of the District of Columbia includes programs and activities of any department, agency, establishment, wholly owned Government corporation, or instrumentality of the Federal Government or of the government of the District of Columbia. (2) Each standing committee shall review from time to time each continuing program within its jurisdiction for which appropriations are not made annually to ascertain whether the program should be modified to provide for annual appropriations. Budget Act responsibilities (f)(1) Each standing committee shall submit to the Committee on the Budget not later than six weeks after the submission of the budget by the President, or at such time as the Committee on the Budget may request-- (A) its views and estimates with respect to all matters to be set forth in the concurrent resolution on the budget for the ensuing fiscal year that are within its jurisdiction or functions; and (B) an estimate of the total amounts of new budget authority, and budget outlays resulting therefrom, to be provided or authorized in all bills and resolutions within its jurisdiction that it intends to be effective during that fiscal year. * * * * * Election and membership of standing committees 5. (a)(1) The standing committees specified in clause 1 shall be elected by the House within seven calendar days after the commencement of each Congress, from nominations submitted by the respective party caucus or conference. A resolution proposing to change the composition of a standing committee shall be privileged if offered by direction of the party caucus or conference concerned. * * * * * (b)(1) Membership on a standing committee during the course of a Congress shall be contingent on continuing membership in the party caucus or conference that nominated the Member, Delegate, or Resident Commissioner concerned for election to such committee. Should a Member, Delegate, or Resident Commissioner cease to be a member of a particular party caucus or conference, that Member, Delegate, or Resident Commissioner shall automatically cease to be a member of each standing committee to which elected on the basis of nomination by that caucus or conference. The chair of the relevant party caucus or conference shall notify the Speaker whenever a Member, Delegate, or Resident Commissioner ceases to be a member of that caucus or conference. The Speaker shall notify the chair of each affected committee that the election of such Member, Delegate, or Resident Commissioner to the committee is automatically vacated under this subparagraph. (2)(A) Except as specified in subdivision (B), a Member, Delegate, or Resident Commissioner may not serve simultaneously as a member of more than two standing committees or more than four subcommittees of the standing committees. (B)(i) Ex officio service by a chair or ranking minority member of a committee on each of its subcommittees under a committee rule does not count against the limitation on subcommittee service. (ii) Service on an investigative subcommittee of the Committee on Ethics under paragraph (a)(4) does not count against the limitation on subcommittee service. (iii) Any other exception to the limitations in subdivision (A) may be approved by the House on the recommendation of the relevant party caucus or conference. (C) In this subparagraph the term ``subcommittee'' includes a panel (other than a special oversight panel of the Committee on Armed Services), task force, special subcommittee, or other subunit of a standing committee that is established for a cumulative period longer than six months in a Congress. (c) One of the members of each standing committee shall be elected by the House, on the nomination of the majority party caucus or conference, as chair thereof. In the absence of the member serving as chair, the member next in rank (and so on, as often as the case shall happen) shall act as chair. Rank shall be determined by the order members are named in resolutions electing them to the committee. In the case of a vacancy in the elected chair of a committee, the House shall elect another chair. (d)(1) Except as permitted by subparagraph (2), a committee may have not more than five subcommittees. (2)(A) A committee that maintains a subcommittee on oversight may have not more than six subcommittees. (B) The Committee on Appropriations may have not more than 13 subcommittees. (C) The Committee on Armed Services may have not more than seven subcommittees. (D) The Committee on Foreign Affairs may have not more than seven subcommittees. (E) The Committee on Oversight and Government Reform may have not more than seven subcommittees. (F) The Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure may have not more than six subcommittees. (e) The House shall fill a vacancy on a standing committee by election on the nomination of the respective party caucus or conference. Expense resolutions 6. (a) Whenever a committee, commission, or other entity (other than the Committee on Appropriations) is granted authorization for the payment of its expenses (including staff salaries) for a Congress, such authorization initially shall be procured by one primary expense resolution reported by the Committee on House Administration. A primary expense resolution may include a reserve fund for unanticipated expenses of committees. An amount from such a reserve fund may be allocated to a committee only by the approval of the Committee on House Administration. A primary expense resolution reported to the House may not be considered in the House unless a report thereon was available on the previous calendar day. For the information of the House, such report shall-- (1) state the total amount of the funds to be provided to the committee, commission, or other entity under the primary expense resolution for all anticipated activities and programs of the committee, commission, or other entity; and (2) to the extent practicable, contain such general statements regarding the estimated foreseeable  for the respective anticipated activities and programs of the committee, commission, or other entity as may be appropriate to provide the House with basic estimates of the expenditures contemplated by the primary expense resolution. (b) After the date of adoption by the House of a primary expense resolution for a committee, commission, or other entity for a Congress, authorization for the payment of additional expenses (including staff salaries) in that Congress may be procured by one or more supplemental expense resolutions reported by the Committee on House Administration, as necessary. A supplemental expense resolution reported to the House may not be considered in the House unless a report thereon was available on the previous calendar day. For the information of the House, such report shall-- (1) state the total amount of additional funds to be provided to the committee, commission, or other entity under the supplemental expense resolution and the purposes for which those additional funds are available; and (2) state the reasons for the failure to procure the additional funds for the committee, commission, or other entity by means of the primary expense resolution. (c) The preceding provisions of this clause do not apply to-- (1) a resolution providing for the payment from committee salary and expense accounts of the House of sums necessary to pay compensation for staff services performed for, or to pay other expenses of, a committee, commission, or other entity at any time after the beginning of an odd- numbered year and before the date of adoption by the House of the primary expense resolution described in paragraph (a) for that year; or (2) a resolution providing each of the standing committees in a Congress additional office equipment, airmail and special-delivery postage stamps, supplies, staff personnel, or any other specific item for the operation of the standing committees, and containing an authorization for the payment from committee salary and expense accounts of the House of the expenses of any of the foregoing items provided by that resolution, subject to and until enactment of the provisions of the resolution as permanent law. (d) From the funds made available for the appointment of committee staff by a primary or additional expense resolution, the chair of each committee shall ensure that sufficient staff is made available to each subcommittee to carry out its responsibilities under the rules of the committee and that the minority party is treated fairly in the appointment of such staff. (e) Funds authorized for a committee under this clause and clauses 7 and 8 are for expenses incurred in the activities of the committee. Interim funding 7. (a) For the period beginning at noon on January 3 and ending at midnight on March 31 in each odd-numbered year, such sums as may be necessary shall be paid out of the committee salary and expense accounts of the House for continuance of necessary investigations and studies by-- (1) each standing and select committee established by these rules; and (2) except as specified in paragraph (b), each select committee established by resolution. (b) In the case of the first session of a Congress, amounts shall be made available for a select committee established by resolution in the preceding Congress only if-- (1) a resolution proposing to reestablish such select committee is introduced in the present Congress; and (2) the House has not adopted a resolution of the preceding Congress providing for termination of funding for investigations and studies by such select committee. (c) Each committee described in paragraph (a) shall be entitled for each month during the period specified in paragraph (a) to 9 percent (or such lesser percentage as may be determined by the Committee on House Administration) of the total annualized amount made available under expense resolutions for such committee in the preceding session of Congress. (d) Payments under this clause shall be made on vouchers authorized by the committee involved, signed by the chair of the committee, except as provided in paragraph (e), and approved by the Committee on House Administration. (e) Notwithstanding any provision of law, rule of the House, or other authority, from noon on January 3 of the first session of a Congress until the election by the House of the committee concerned in that Congress, payments under this clause shall be made on vouchers signed by the ranking member of the committee as it was constituted at the expiration of the preceding Congress who is a member of the majority party in the present Congress. (f)(1) The authority of a committee to incur expenses under this clause shall expire upon adoption by the House of a primary expense resolution for the committee. (2) Amounts made available under this clause shall be expended in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Committee on House Administration. (3) This clause shall be effective only insofar as it is not inconsistent with a resolution reported by the Committee on House Administration and adopted by the House after the adoption of these rules. Travel 8. (a) Local currencies owned by the United States shall be made available to the committee and its employees engaged in carrying out their official duties outside the United States or its territories or possessions. Appropriated funds, including those authorized under this clause and clause 6, may not be expended for the purpose of defraying expenses of members of a committee or its employees in a country where local currencies are available for this purpose. (b) The following conditions shall apply with respect to travel outside the United States or its territories or possessions: (1) A member or employee of a committee may not receive or expend local currencies for subsistence in a country for a day at a rate in excess of the maximum per diem set forth in applicable Federal law. (2) A member or employee shall be reimbursed for the expenses of such individual for a day at the lesser of-- (A) the per diem set forth in applicable Federal law; or (B) the actual, unreimbursed expenses (other than for transportation) incurred during that day. (3) Each member or employee of a committee shall make to the chair of the committee an itemized report showing the dates each country was visited, the amount of per diem furnished, the cost of transportation furnished, and funds expended for any other official purpose and shall summarize in these categories the total foreign currencies or appropriated funds expended. Each report shall be filed with the chair of the committee not later than 60 days following the completion of travel for use in complying with reporting requirements in applicable Federal law and shall be open for public inspection. (c)(1) In carrying out the activities of a committee outside the United States in a country where local currencies are unavailable, a member or employee of a committee may not receive reimbursement for expenses (other than for transportation) in excess of the maximum per diem set forth in applicable Federal law. (2) A member or employee shall be reimbursed for the expenses of such individual for a day, at the lesser of-- (A) the per diem set forth in applicable Federal law; or (B) the actual unreimbursed expenses (other than for transportation) incurred during that day. (3) A member or employee of a committee may not receive reimbursement for the cost of any transportation in connection with travel outside the United States unless the member or employee actually paid for the transportation. (d) The restrictions respecting travel outside the United States set forth in paragraph (c) also shall apply to travel outside the United States by a Member, Delegate, Resident Commissioner, officer, or employee of the House authorized under any standing rule. Committee staffs 9. (a)(1) Subject to subparagraph (2) and paragraph (f), each standing committee may appoint, by majority vote, not more than 30 professional staff members to be compensated from the funds provided for the appointment of committee staff by primary and additional expense resolutions. Each professional staff member appointed under this subparagraph shall be assigned to the chair and the ranking minority member of the committee, as the committee considers advisable. (2) Subject to paragraph (f) whenever a majority of the minority party members of a standing committee (other than the Committee on Ethics or the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence) so request, not more than 10 persons (or one-third of the total professional committee staff appointed under this clause, whichever is fewer) may be selected, by majority vote of the minority party members, for appointment by the committee as professional staff members under subparagraph (1). The committee shall appoint persons so selected whose character and qualifications are acceptable to a majority of the committee. If the committee determines that the character and qualifications of a person so selected are unacceptable, a majority of the minority party members may select another person for appointment by the committee to the professional staff until such appointment is made. Each professional staff member appointed under this subparagraph shall be assigned to such committee business as the minority party members of the committee consider advisable. (b)(1) The professional staff members of each standing committee-- (A) may not engage in any work other than committee business during congressional working hours; and (B) may not be assigned a duty other than one pertaining to committee business. (2)(A) Subparagraph (1) does not apply to staff designated by a committee as ``associate'' or ``shared'' staff who are not paid exclusively by the committee, provided that the chair certifies that the compensation paid by the committee for any such staff is commensurate with the work performed for the committee in accordance with clause 8 of rule XXIII. (B) The use of any ``associate'' or ``shared'' staff by a committee other than the Committee on Appropriations shall be subject to the review of, and to any terms, conditions, or limitations established by, the Committee on House Administration in connection with the reporting of any primary or additional expense resolution. (c) Each employee on the professional or investigative staff of a standing committee shall be entitled to pay at a single gross per annum rate, to be fixed by the chair and that does not exceed the maximum rate of pay as in effect from time to time under applicable provisions of law. (d) Subject to appropriations hereby authorized, the Committee on Appropriations may appoint by majority vote such staff as it determines to be necessary (in addition to the clerk of the committee and assistants for the minority). The staff appointed under this paragraph, other than minority assistants, shall possess such qualifications as the committee may prescribe. (e) A committee may not appoint to its staff an expert or other personnel detailed or assigned from a department or agency of the Government except with the written permission of the Committee on House Administration. (f) If a request for the appointment of a minority professional staff member under paragraph (a) is made when no vacancy exists for such an appointment, the committee nevertheless may appoint under paragraph (a) a person selected by the minority and acceptable to the committee. A person so appointed shall serve as an additional member of the professional staff of the committee until such a vacancy occurs (other than a vacancy in the position of head of the professional staff, by whatever title designated), at which time that person is considered as appointed to that vacancy. Such a person shall be paid from the applicable accounts of the House described in clause 1(k)(1) of rule X. If such a vacancy occurs on the professional staff when seven or more persons have been so appointed who are eligible to fill that vacancy, a majority of the minority party members shall designate which of those persons shall fill the vacancy. (g) Each staff member appointed pursuant to a request by minority party members under paragraph (a), and each staff member appointed to assist minority members of a committee pursuant to an expense resolution described in clause 6(a), shall be accorded equitable treatment with respect to the fixing of the rate of pay, the assignment of work facilities, and the accessibility of committee records. (h) Paragraph (a) may not be construed to authorize the appointment of additional professional staff members of a committee pursuant to a request under paragraph (a) by the minority party members of that committee if 10 or more professional staff members provided for in paragraph (a)(1) who are satisfactory to a majority of the minority party members are otherwise assigned to assist the minority party members. (i) Notwithstanding paragraph (a)(2), a committee may employ nonpartisan staff, in lieu of or in addition to committee staff designated exclusively for the majority or minority party, by an affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the majority party and of a majority of the members of the minority party. Select and joint committees 10. (a) Membership on a select or joint committee appointed by the Speaker under clause 11 of rule I during the course of a Congress shall be contingent on continuing membership in the party caucus or conference of which the Member, Delegate, or Resident Commissioner concerned was a member at the time of appointment. Should a Member, Delegate, or Resident Commissioner cease to be a member of that caucus or conference, that Member, Delegate, or Resident Commissioner shall automatically cease to be a member of any select or joint committee to which assigned. The chair of the relevant party caucus or conference shall notify the Speaker whenever a Member, Delegate, or Resident Commissioner ceases to be a member of a party caucus or conference. The Speaker shall notify the chair of each affected select or joint committee that the appointment of such Member, Delegate, or Resident Commissioner to the select or joint committee is automatically vacated under this paragraph. (b) Each select or joint committee, other than a conference committee, shall comply with clause 2(a) of rule XI unless specifically exempted by law. * * * * * Rule XI Procedures of Committees and Unfinished Business In general 1. (a)(1)(A) The Rules of the House are the rules of its committees and subcommittees so far as applicable. (B) Each subcommittee is a part of its committee and is subject to the authority and direction of that committee and to its rules, so far as applicable. (2)(A) In a committee or subcommittee-- (i) a motion to recess from day to day, or to recess subject to the call of the Chair (within 24 hours), shall be privileged; and (ii) a motion to dispense with the first reading (in full) of a bill or resolution shall be privileged if printed copies are available. (B) A motion accorded privilege under this subparagraph shall be decided without debate. (b)(1) Each committee may conduct at any time such investigations and studies as it considers necessary or appropriate in the exercise of its responsibilities under rule X. Subject to the adoption of expense resolutions as required by clause 6 of rule X, each committee may incur expenses, including travel expenses, in connection with such investigations and studies. (2) A proposed investigative or oversight report shall be considered as read in committee if it has been available to the members for at least 24 hours (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, or legal holidays except when the House is in session on such a day). (3) A report of an investigation or study conducted jointly by more than one committee may be filed jointly, provided that each of the committees complies independently with all requirements for approval and filing of the report. (4) After an adjournment sine die of the last regular session of a Congress, an investigative or oversight report may be filed with the Clerk at any time, provided that a member who gives timely notice of intention to file supplemental, minority, additional, or dissenting views shall be entitled to not less than seven calendar days in which to submit such views for inclusion in the report. (c) Each committee may have printed and bound such testimony and other data as may be presented at hearings held by the committee or its subcommittees. All costs of stenographic services and transcripts in connection with a meeting or hearing of a committee shall be paid from the applicable accounts of the House described in clause 1(k)(1) of rule X. (d)(1) Not later than January 2 of each odd-numbered year, a committee shall submit to the House a report on the activities of that committee. (2) Such report shall include-- (A) separate sections summarizing the legislative and oversight activities of that committee under this rule and rule X during the Congress; (B) a summary of the authorization and oversight plans submitted by the committee under clause 2(d) of rule X; (C) a summary of the actions taken and recommendations made with respect to the authorization and oversight plans specified in subdivision (B); (D) a summary of any additional oversight activities undertaken by that committee and any recommendations made or actions taken thereon; and (E) a delineation of any hearings held pursuant to clauses 2(o), (p), or (q) of this rule. (3) After an adjournment sine die of the last regular session of a Congress, or after December 15 of an even-numbered year, whichever occurs first, the chair of a committee may file the report described in subparagraph (1) with the Clerk at any time and without approval of the committee, provided that-- (A) a copy of the report has been available to each member of the committee for at least seven calendar days; and (B) the report includes any supplemental, minority, additional, or dissenting views submitted by a member of the committee. Adoption of written rules 2. (a)(1) Each standing committee shall adopt written rules governing its procedure. Such rules-- (A) shall be adopted in a meeting that is open to the public unless the committee, in open session and with a quorum present, determines by record vote that all or part of the meeting on that day shall be closed to the public; (B) may not be inconsistent with the Rules of the House or with those provisions of law having the force and effect of Rules of the House; (C) shall in any event incorporate all of the succeeding provisions of this clause to the extent applicable; and (D) shall include provisions to govern the implementation of clause 4 as provided in paragraph (f) of such clause. (2) Each committee shall make its rules publicly available in electronic form and submit such rules for publication in the Congressional Record not later than 60 days after the chair of the committee is elected in each odd-numbered year. (3) A committee may adopt a rule providing that the chair be directed to offer a motion under clause 1 of rule XXII whenever the chair considers it appropriate. Regular meeting days (b) Each standing committee shall establish regular meeting days for the conduct of its business, which shall be not less frequent than monthly. Each such committee shall meet for the consideration of a bill or resolution pending before the committee or the transaction of other committee business on all regular meeting days fixed by the committee if notice is given pursuant to paragraph (g)(3). Additional and special meetings (c)(1) The chair of each standing committee may call and convene, as the chair considers necessary, additional and special meetings of the committee for the consideration of a bill or resolution pending before the committee or for the conduct of other committee business, subject to such rules as the committee may adopt. The committee shall meet for such purpose under that call of the chair. (2) Three or more members of a standing committee may file in the offices of the committee a written request that the chair call a special meeting of the committee. Such request shall specify the measure or matter to be considered. Immediately upon the filing of the request, the clerk of the committee shall notify the chair of the filing of the request. If the chair does not call the requested special meeting within three calendar days after the filing of the request (to be held within seven calendar days after the filing of the request) a majority of the members of the committee may file in the offices of the committee their written notice that a special meeting of the committee will be held. The written notice shall specify the date and hour of the special meeting and the measure or matter to be considered. The committee shall meet on that date and hour. Immediately upon the filing of the notice, the clerk of the committee shall notify all members of the committee that such special meeting will be held and inform them of its date and hour and the measure or matter to be considered. Such notice shall also be made publicly available in electronic form and shall be deemed to satisfy paragraph (g)(3)(A)(ii). Only the measure or matter specified in that notice may be considered at that special meeting. Temporary absence of chair (d) A member of the majority party on each standing committee or subcommittee thereof shall be designated by the chair of the full committee as the vice chair of the committee or subcommittee, as the case may be, and shall preside during the absence of the chair from any meeting. If the chair and vice chair of a committee or subcommittee are not present at any meeting of the committee or subcommittee, the ranking majority member who is present shall preside at that meeting. Committee records (e)(1)(A) Each committee shall keep a complete record of all committee action which shall include-- (i) in the case of a meeting or hearing transcript, a substantially verbatim account of remarks actually made during the proceedings, subject only to technical, grammatical, and typographical corrections authorized by the person making the remarks involved; and (ii) a record of the votes on any question on which a record vote is taken. (B)(i) Except as provided in item (ii) and subject to paragraph (k)(7), the result of each such record vote shall be made publicly available in electronic form within 48 hours of such record vote. Information so available shall include a description of the amendment, motion, order, or other proposition, the name of each member voting for and each member voting against such amendment, motion, order, or proposition, and the names of those members of the committee present but not voting. * * * * * (2)(A) Except as provided in subdivision (B), all committee records (including hearings, data, charts, and files) shall be kept separate and distinct from the congressional office records of the member serving as its chair. Such records shall be the property of the House, and each Member, Delegate, and the Resident Commissioner shall have access thereto. (B) A Member, Delegate, or Resident Commissioner, other than members of the Committee on Ethics, may not have access to the records of that committee respecting the conduct of a Member, Delegate, Resident Commissioner, officer, or employee of the House without the specific prior permission of that committee. (3) Each committee shall include in its rules standards for availability of records of the committee delivered to the Archivist of the United States under rule VII. Such standards shall specify procedures for orders of the committee under clause 3(b)(3) and clause 4(b) of rule VII, including a requirement that nonavailability of a record for a period longer than the period otherwise applicable under that rule shall be approved by vote of the committee. (4) Each committee shall make its publications available in electronic form to the maximum extent feasible. (5) To the maximum extent practicable, each committee shall-- (A) provide audio and video coverage of each hearing or meeting for the transaction of business in a manner that allows the public to easily listen to and view the proceedings; and (B) maintain the recordings of such coverage in a manner that is easily accessible to the public. (6) Not later than 24 hours after the adoption of any amendment, or 48 hours after the disposition or withdrawal of any other amendment, to a measure or matter considered by a committee, the chair of such committee shall cause the text of each such amendment to be made publicly available in electronic form. Prohibition against proxy voting (f) A vote by a member of a committee or subcommittee with respect to any measure or matter may not be cast by proxy. Open meetings and hearings (g)(1) Each meeting for the transaction of business, including the markup of legislation, by a standing committee or subcommittee thereof (other than the Committee on Ethics or its subcommittees) shall be open to the public, including to radio, television, and still photography coverage, except when the committee or subcommittee, in open session and with a majority present, determines by record vote that all or part of the remainder of the meeting on that day shall be in executive session because disclosure of matters to be considered would endanger national security, would compromise sensitive law enforcement information, would tend to defame, degrade, or incriminate any person, or otherwise would violate a law or rule of the House. Persons, other than members of the committee and such noncommittee Members, Delegates, Resident Commissioner, congressional staff, or departmental representatives as the committee may authorize, may not be present at a business or markup session that is held in executive session. This subparagraph does not apply to open committee hearings, which are governed by clause 4(a)(1) of rule X or by subparagraph (2). (2)(A) Each hearing conducted by a committee or subcommittee (other than the Committee on Ethics or its subcommittees) shall be open to the public, including to radio, television, and still photography coverage, except when the committee or subcommittee, in open session and with a majority present, determines by record vote that all or part of the remainder of that hearing on that day shall be closed to the public because disclosure of testimony, evidence, or other matters to be considered would endanger national security, would compromise sensitive law enforcement information, or would violate a law or rule of the House. (B) Notwithstanding the requirements of subdivision (A), in the presence of the number of members required under the rules of the committee for the purpose of taking testimony, a majority of those present may-- (i) agree to close the hearing for the sole purpose of discussing whether testimony or evidence to be received would endanger national security, would compromise sensitive law enforcement information, or would violate clause 2(k)(5); or (ii) agree to close the hearing as provided in clause 2(k)(5). (C) A Member, Delegate, or Resident Commissioner may not be excluded from nonparticipatory attendance at a hearing of a committee or subcommittee (other than the Committee on Ethics or its subcommittees) unless the House by majority vote authorizes a particular committee or subcommittee, for purposes of a particular series of hearings on a particular article of legislation or on a particular subject of investigation, to close its hearings to Members, Delegates, and the Resident Commissioner by the same procedures specified in this subparagraph for closing hearings to the public. (D) The committee or subcommittee may vote by the same procedure described in this subparagraph to close one subsequent day of hearing, except that the Committee on Appropriations, the Committee on Armed Services, the Committee on Homeland Security, and the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and the subcommittees thereof, may vote by the same procedure to close up to five additional, consecutive days of hearings. (3)(A) The chair of a committee shall announce the date, place, and subject matter of-- (i) a committee hearing, which may not commence earlier than one week after such notice; or (ii) a committee meeting, which may not commence earlier than the third calendar day (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, or legal holidays except when the House is in session on such a day) on which members have notice thereof. (B) A hearing or meeting may begin sooner than specified in subdivision (A) in either of the following circumstances (in which case the chair shall make the announcement specified in subdivision (A) at the earliest possible time): (i) the chair of the committee, with the concurrence of the ranking minority member, determines that there is good cause; or (ii) the committee so determines by majority vote in the presence of the number of members required under the rules of the committee for the transaction of business. (C) An announcement made under this subparagraph shall be published promptly in the Daily Digest and made publicly available in electronic form. (D) This subparagraph and subparagraph (4) shall not apply to the Committee on Rules. (4) At least 24 hours prior to the commencement of a meeting for the markup of legislation, or at the time of an announcement under subparagraph (3)(B) made within 24 hours before such meeting, the chair of the committee shall cause the text of such legislation to be made publicly available in electronic form. (5)(A) Each committee shall, to the greatest extent practicable, require witnesses who appear before it to submit in advance written statements of proposed testimony and to limit their initial presentations to the committee to brief summaries thereof. (B) In the case of a witness appearing in a non-governmental capacity, a written statement of proposed testimony shall include-- (i) a curriculum vitae; (ii) a disclosure of any Federal grants or contracts, or contracts, grants, or payments originating with a foreign government, received during the past 36 months by the witness or by an entity represented by the witness and related to the subject matter of the hearing; and (iii) a disclosure of whether the witness is a fiduciary (including, but not limited to, a director, officer, advisor, or resident agent) of any organization or entity that has an interest in the subject matter of the hearing. (C) The disclosure referred to in subdivision (B)(ii) shall include-- (i) the amount and source of each Federal grant (or subgrant thereof) or contract (or subcontract thereof) related to the subject matter of the hearing; and (ii) the amount and country of origin of any payment or contract related to the subject matter of the hearing originating with a foreign government. (D) Such statements, with appropriate redactions to protect the privacy or security of the witness, shall be made publicly available in electronic form 24 hours before the witness appears to the extent practicable, but not later than one day after the witness appears. (6)(A) Except as provided in subdivision (B), a point of order does not lie with respect to a measure reported by a committee on the ground that hearings on such measure were not conducted in accordance with this clause. (B) A point of order on the ground described in subdivision (A) may be made by a member of the committee that reported the measure if such point of order was timely made and improperly disposed of in the committee. * * * * * Quorum requirements (h)(1) A measure or recommendation may not be reported by a committee unless a majority of the committee is actually present. (2) Each committee may fix the number of its members to constitute a quorum for taking testimony and receiving evidence, which may not be less than two. (3) Each committee (other than the Committee on Appropriations, the Committee on the Budget, and the Committee on Ways and Means) may fix the number of its members to constitute a quorum for taking any action other than one for which the presence of a majority of the committee is otherwise required, which may not be less than one-third of the members. (4)(A) Each committee may adopt a rule authorizing the chair of a committee or subcommittee-- (i) to postpone further proceedings when a record vote is ordered on the question of approving a measure or matter or on adopting an amendment; and (ii) to resume proceedings on a postponed question at any time after reasonable notice. (B) A rule adopted pursuant to this subparagraph shall provide that when proceedings resume on a postponed question, notwithstanding any intervening order for the previous question, an underlying proposition shall remain subject to further debate or amendment to the same extent as when the question was postponed. Limitation on committee sittings (i) A committee may not sit during a joint session of the House and Senate or during a recess when a joint meeting of the House and Senate is in progress. Calling and questioning of witnesses (j)(1) Whenever a hearing is conducted by a committee on a measure or matter, the minority members of the committee shall be entitled, upon request to the chair by a majority of them before the completion of the hearing, to call witnesses selected by the minority to testify with respect to that measure or matter during at least one day of hearing thereon. (2)(A) Subject to subdivisions (B) and (C), each committee shall apply the five-minute rule during the questioning of witnesses in a hearing until such time as each member of the committee who so desires has had an opportunity to question each witness. (B) A committee may adopt a rule or motion permitting a specified number of its members to question a witness for longer than five minutes. The time for extended questioning of a witness under this subdivision shall be equal for the majority party and the minority party and may not exceed one hour in the aggregate. (C) A committee may adopt a rule or motion permitting committee staff for its majority and minority party members to question a witness for equal specified periods. The time for extended questioning of a witness under this subdivision shall be equal for the majority party and the minority party and may not exceed one hour in the aggregate. Hearing procedures (k)(1) The chair at a hearing shall announce in an opening statement the subject of the hearing. (2) A copy of the committee rules and of this clause shall be made available to each witness on request. (3) Witnesses at hearings may be accompanied by their own counsel for the purpose of advising them concerning their constitutional rights. (4) The chair may punish breaches of order and decorum, and of professional ethics on the part of counsel, by censure and exclusion from the hearings; and the committee may cite the offender to the House for contempt. (5) Whenever it is asserted by a member of the committee that the evidence or testimony at a hearing may tend to defame, degrade, or incriminate any person, or it is asserted by a witness that the evidence or testimony that the witness would give at a hearing may tend to defame, degrade, or incriminate the witness-- (A) notwithstanding paragraph (g)(2), such testimony or evidence shall be presented in executive session if, in the presence of the number of members required under the rules of the committee for the purpose of taking testimony, the committee determines by vote of a majority of those present that such evidence or testimony may tend to defame, degrade, or incriminate any person; and (B) the committee shall proceed to receive such testimony in open session only if the committee, a majority being present, determines that such evidence or testimony will not tend to defame, degrade, or incriminate any person. In either case the committee shall afford such person an opportunity voluntarily to appear as a witness, and receive and dispose of requests from such person to subpoena additional witnesses. (6) Except as provided in subparagraph (5), the chair shall receive and the committee shall dispose of requests to subpoena additional witnesses. (7) Evidence or testimony taken in executive session, and proceedings conducted in executive session, may be released or used in public sessions only when authorized by the committee, a majority being present. (8) In the discretion of the committee, witnesses may submit brief and pertinent sworn statements in writing for inclusion in the record. The committee is the sole judge of the pertinence of testimony and evidence adduced at its hearing. (9) A witness may obtain a transcript copy of the testimony of such witness given at a public session or, if given at an executive session, when authorized by the committee. Supplemental, minority, additional, or dissenting views (l) If at the time of approval of a measure or matter by a committee (other than the Committee on Rules) a member of the committee gives notice of intention to file supplemental, minority, additional, or dissenting views for inclusion in the report to the House thereon, all members shall be entitled to not less than two additional calendar days after the day of such notice (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays except when the House is in session on such a day) to file such written and signed views (including in electronic form) with the clerk of the committee. Power to sit and act; subpoena power (m)(1) For the purpose of carrying out any of its functions and duties under this rule and rule X (including any matters referred to it under clause 2 of rule XII), a committee or subcommittee is authorized (subject to subparagraph (3)(A))-- (A) to sit and act at such times and places within the United States, whether the House is in session, has recessed, or has adjourned, and to hold such hearings as it considers necessary; and (B) to require, by subpoena or otherwise, the attendance and testimony of such witnesses and the production of such books, records, correspondence, memoranda, papers, and documents as it considers necessary. (2) The chair of the committee, or a member designated by the chair, may administer oaths to witnesses. (3)(A)(i) Except as provided in subdivision (A)(ii), a subpoena may be authorized and issued by a committee or subcommittee under subparagraph (1)(B) in the conduct of an investigation or series of investigations or activities only when authorized by the committee or subcommittee, a majority being present. The power to authorize and issue subpoenas under subparagraph (1)(B) may be delegated to the chair of the committee under such rules and under such limitations as the committee may prescribe. Authorized subpoenas shall be signed by the chair of the committee or by a member designated by the committee. (ii) In the case of a subcommittee of the Committee on Ethics, a subpoena may be authorized and issued only by an affirmative vote of a majority of its members. (B) A subpoena duces tecum may specify terms of return other than at a meeting or hearing of the committee or subcommittee authorizing the subpoena. (C) Compliance with a subpoena issued by a committee or subcommittee under subparagraph (1)(B) may be enforced only as authorized or directed by the House. (D) Subpoenas for documents or testimony may be issued to any person or entity, whether governmental, public, or private, within the United States, including, but not limited to, the President, and the Vice President, whether current or former, in a personal or official capacity, as well as the White House, the Office of the President, the Executive Office of the President, and any individual currently or formerly employed in the White House, Office of the President, or Executive Office of the President. (n) A committee may adopt a rule or motion permitting the use of electronic voting in accordance with regulations submitted for printing in the Congressional Record by the chair of the Committee on Rules and the chair of the Committee on House Administration. (o)(1) Each standing committee, or a subcommittee thereof, shall hold at least one hearing during each 120-day period following the establishment of the committee on the topic of waste, fraud, abuse, or mismanagement in Government programs which that committee may authorize. (2) A hearing described in subparagraph (1) shall include a focus on the most egregious instances of waste, fraud, abuse, or mismanagement as documented by any report the committee has received from a Federal Office of the Inspector General or the Comptroller General of the United States. (p) Each committee, or a subcommittee thereof, shall hold at least one hearing in any session in which the committee has received disclaimers of agency financial statements from auditors of any Federal agency that the committee may authorize to hear testimony on such disclaimers from representatives of any such agency. (q) Each standing committee, or a subcommittee thereof, shall hold at least one hearing on issues raised by reports issued by the Comptroller General of the United States indicating that Federal programs or operations that the committee may authorize are at high risk for waste, fraud, and mismanagement, known as the ``high-risk list'' or the ``high- risk series.'' * * * * * Audio and visual coverage of committee proceedings 4. (a) The purpose of this clause is to provide a means, in conformity with acceptable standards of dignity, propriety, and decorum, by which committee hearings or committee meetings that are open to the public may be covered by audio and visual means-- (1) for the education, enlightenment, and information of the general public, on the basis of accurate and impartial news coverage, regarding the operations, procedures, and practices of the House as a legislative and representative body, and regarding the measures, public issues, and other matters before the House and its committees, the consideration thereof, and the action taken thereon; and (2) for the development of the perspective and understanding of the general public with respect to the role and function of the House under the Constitution as an institution of the Federal Government. (b) In addition, it is the intent of this clause that audio and video recordings of any coverage under this clause may not be used for any partisan political campaign purpose or be made available for such use. (c) It is, further, the intent of this clause that the general conduct of each meeting (whether of a hearing or otherwise) covered under authority of this clause by audio or visual means, and the personal behavior of the committee members and staff, other Government officials and personnel, witnesses, television, radio, and press media personnel, and the general public at the hearing or other meeting, shall be in strict conformity with and observance of the acceptable standards of dignity, propriety, courtesy, and decorum traditionally observed by the House in its operations, and may not be such as to-- (1) distort the objects and purposes of the hearing or other meeting or the activities of committee members in connection with that hearing or meeting or in connection with the general work of the committee or of the House; or (2) cast discredit or dishonor on the House, the committee, or a Member, Delegate, or Resident Commissioner or bring the House, the committee, or a Member, Delegate, or Resident Commissioner into disrepute. (d) The coverage of committee hearings and meetings by audio and visual means shall be permitted and conducted only in strict conformity with the purposes, provisions, and requirements of this clause. (e) Whenever a hearing or meeting conducted by a committee or subcommittee is open to the public, those proceedings shall be open to coverage by audio and visual means. A committee or subcommittee chair may not limit the number of television or still cameras to fewer than two representatives from each medium (except for legitimate space or safety considerations, in which case pool coverage shall be authorized). (f) Written rules adopted by each committee pursuant to clause 2(a)(1)(D) shall contain provisions to the following effect: (1) If audio or visual coverage of the hearing or meeting is to be presented to the public as live coverage, that coverage shall be conducted and presented without commercial sponsorship. (2) The allocation among the television media of the positions or the number of television cameras permitted by a committee or subcommittee chair in a hearing or meeting room shall be in accordance with fair and equitable procedures devised by the Executive Committee of the Radio and Television Correspondents' Galleries. (3) Television cameras shall be placed so as not to obstruct in any way the space between a witness giving evidence or testimony and any member of the committee or the visibility of that witness and that member to each other. (4) Television cameras shall operate from fixed positions but may not be placed in positions that obstruct unnecessarily the coverage of the hearing or meeting by the other media. (5) Equipment necessary for coverage by the television and radio media may not be installed in, or removed from, the hearing or meeting room while the committee is in session. (6)(A) Except as provided in subdivision (B), floodlights, spotlights, strobelights, and flashguns may not be used in providing any method of coverage of the hearing or meeting. (B) The television media may install additional lighting in a hearing or meeting room, without cost to the Government, in order to raise the ambient lighting level in a hearing or meeting room to the lowest level necessary to provide adequate television coverage of a hearing or meeting at the current state of the art of television coverage. (7) If requests are made by more of the media than will be permitted by a committee or subcommittee chair for coverage of a hearing or meeting by still photography, that coverage shall be permitted on the basis of a fair and equitable pool arrangement devised by the Standing Committee of Press Photographers. (8) Photographers may not position themselves between the witness table and the members of the committee at any time during the course of a hearing or meeting. (9) Photographers may not place themselves in positions that obstruct unnecessarily the coverage of the hearing by the other media. (10) Personnel providing coverage by the television and radio media shall be currently accredited to the Radio and Television Correspondents' Galleries. (11) Personnel providing coverage by still photography shall be currently accredited to the Press Photographers' Gallery. (12) Personnel providing coverage by the television and radio media and by still photography shall conduct themselves and their coverage activities in an orderly and unobtrusive manner. Pay of witnesses 5. Witnesses appearing before the House or any of its committees shall be paid the same per diem rate as established, authorized, and regulated by the Committee on House Administration for Members, Delegates, the Resident Commissioner, and employees of the House, plus actual expenses of travel to or from the place of examination. Such per diem may not be paid when a witness has been summoned at the place of examination. Unfinished business of the session 6. All business of the House at the end of one session shall be resumed at the commencement of the next session of the same Congress in the same manner as if no adjournment had taken place. * * * * * Rule XXII House and Senate Relations Senate amendments 1. A motion to disagree to Senate amendments to a House proposition and to request or agree to a conference with the Senate, or a motion to insist on House amendments to a Senate proposition and to request or agree to a conference with the Senate, shall be privileged in the discretion of the Speaker if offered by direction of the primary committee and of all reporting committees that had initial referral of the proposition. * * * * * Appendix B EXCERPTS RELATING TO LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURE FROM THE CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET ACT OF 1974 (2 U.S.C. 621 ET SEQ.) * --------------------------------------------------------------------------- * Editor's note: Where possible language and references from the original Act are retained, conforming language for the U.S. Code is in . --------------------------------------------------------------------------- declaration of purposes  Sec. 2. The Congress declares that it is essential-- (1) to assure effective congressional control over the budgetary process; (2) to provide for the congressional determination each year of the appropriate level of Federal revenues and expenditures; (3) to provide a system of impoundment control; (4) to establish national budget priorities; and (5) to provide for the furnishing of information by the executive branch in a manner that will assist the Congress in discharging its duties. definitions  Sec. 3. For purposes of this Act-- (1) The terms ``budget outlays'' and ``outlays'' mean, with respect to any fiscal year, expenditures and net lending of funds under budget authority during such year. (2) Budget authority and new budget authority.-- (A) In general.--The term ``budget authority'' means the authority provided by Federal law to incur financial obligations, as follows: (i) provisions of law that make funds available for obligation and expenditure (other than borrowing authority), including the authority to obligate and expend the proceeds of offsetting receipts and collections; (ii) borrowing authority, which means authority granted to a Federal entity to borrow and obligate and expend the borrowed funds, including through the issuance of promissory notes or other monetary credits; (iii) contract authority, which means the making of funds avail- able for obligation but not for expenditure; and (iv) offsetting receipts and collections as negative budget authority, and the reduction thereof as positive budget authority. (B) Limitations on budget authority.--With respect to the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund, the Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund, the Unemployment Trust Fund, and the railroad retirement account, any amount that is precluded from obligation in a fiscal year by a provision of law (such as a limitation or a benefit formula) shall not be budget authority in that year. (C) New budget authority.--The term ``new budget authority'' means, with respect to a fiscal year-- (i) budget authority that first becomes available for obligation in that year, including budget authority that becomes available in that year s \1\ a result of a reappropriation; or --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \1\ So in original. Probably should be ``as''. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- (ii) a change in any account in the availability of unobligated balances of budget authority carried over from a prior year, resulting from a provision of law first effective in that year; and includes a change in the estimated level of new budget authority provided in indefinite amounts by existing law. * * * * * (4) The term ``concurrent resolution on the budget'' means-- (A) a concurrent resolution setting forth the congressional budget for the United States Government for a fiscal year as provided in section 301 ; and (B) any other concurrent resolution revising the congressional budget for the United States Government for a fiscal year as described in section 304 . (5) The term ``appropriation Act'' means an Act referred to in section 105 of title 1. (6) The term ``deficit'' means, with respect to a fiscal year, the amount by which outlays exceeds \2\ receipts during that year. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \2\ So in original. Probably should be ``exceed''. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- (7) The term ``surplus'' means, with respect to a fiscal year, the amount by which receipts exceeds \2\ outlays during that year. (8) The term ``government-sponsored enterprise'' means a corporate entity created by a law of the United States that-- (A)(i) has a Federal charter authorized by law; (ii) is privately owned, as evidenced by capital stock owned by private entities or individuals; (iii) is under the direction of a board of directors, a majority of which is elected by private owners; (iv) is a financial institution with power to-- (I) make loans or loan guarantees for limited purposes such as to provide credit for specific borrowers or one sector; and (II) raise funds by borrowing (which does not carry the full faith and credit of the Federal Government) or to guarantee the debt of others in unlimited amounts; and (B)(i) does not exercise powers that are reserved to the Government as sovereign (such as the power to tax or to regulate interstate commerce); (ii) does not have the power to commit the Government financially (but it may be a recipient of a loan guarantee commitment made by the Government); and (iii) has employees whose salaries and expenses are paid by the enterprise and are not Federal employees subject to title 5. (9) The term ``entitlement authority'' means-- (A) the authority to make payments (including loans and grants), the budget authority for which is not provided for in advance by appropriation Acts, to any person or government if, under the provisions of the law containing that authority, the United States is obligated to make such payments to persons or governments who meet the requirements established by that law; and (B) the food stamp program. (10) The term ``credit authority'' means authority to incur direct loan obligations or to incur primary loan guarantee commitments. * * * * * TITLE III--CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET PROCESS  timetable  Sec. 300. The timetable with respect to the congressional budget process for any fiscal year is as follows: On or before: Action to be completed: First Monday in February............... President submits his budget. February 15............................ Congressional Budget Office submits report to Budget Committees. Not later than 6 weeks after President Committees submit views and submits budget.\3\ estimates to Budget Committees. \3\ The date for committees' submissions of views and estimates was amended by the Budget Enforcement Act of 1997 (sec. 10104(a), P.L. 105-33). April 1................................ Senate Budget Committee reports concurrent resolution on the budget. April 15............................... Congress completes action on concurrent resolution on the budget. May 15................................. Annual appropriation bills may be considered in the House. June 10................................ House Appropriations Committee reports last annual appropriation bill. June 15................................ Congress completes action on reconciliation legislation. June 30................................ House completes action on annual appropriation bills. October 1.............................. Fiscal year begins. annual adoption of concurrent resolution on the budget  Sec. 301. (a) Content of Concurrent Resolution on the Budget.--On or before April 15 of each year, the Congress shall complete action on a concurrent resolution on the budget for the fiscal year beginning on October 1 of such year. The concurrent resolution shall set forth appropriate levels for the fiscal year beginning on October 1 of such year and for at least each of the 4 ensuing fiscal years for the following-- (1) totals of new budget authority and outlays; (2) total Federal revenues and the amount, if any, by which the aggregate level of Federal revenues should be increased or decreased by bills and resolutions to be reported by the appropriate committees; (3) the surplus or deficit in the budget; (4) new budget authority and outlays for each major functional category, based on allocations of the total levels set forth pursuant to paragraph (1); (5) the public debt; (6) for purposes of Senate enforcement under this title , outlays of the old-age, survivors, and disability insurance program established under title II of the Social Security Act  for the fiscal year of the resolution and for each of the 4 succeeding fiscal years; and (7) for purposes of Senate enforcement under this title , revenues of the old-age, survivors, and disability insurance program established under title II of the Social Security Act (and the related provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 ) for the fiscal year of the resolution and for each of the 4 succeeding fiscal years. The concurrent resolution shall not include the outlays and revenue totals of the old-age, survivors, and disability insurance program established under title II of the Social Security Act or the related provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 in the surplus or deficit totals required by this subsection or in any other surplus or deficit totals required by this subchapter. * * * * * (d) Views and Estimates of Other Committees.--Within 6 weeks after the President submits a budget under section 1105(a) of title 31, or at such time as may be requested by the Committee on the Budget, each committee of the House of Representatives having legislative jurisdiction shall submit to the Committee on the Budget of the House and each committee of the Senate having legislative jurisdiction shall submit to the Committee on the Budget of the Senate its views and estimates (as determined by the committee making such submission) with respect to all matters set forth in subsections (a) and (b) which relate to matters within the jurisdiction or functions of such committee. The Joint Economic Committee shall submit to the Committees on the Budget of both Houses its recommendations as to the fiscal policy appropriate to the goals of the Employment Act of 1946 . Any other committee of the House of Representatives or the Senate may submit to the Committee on the Budget of its House, and any joint committee of the Congress may submit to the Committees on the Budget of both Houses, its views and estimates with respect to all matters set forth in subsections (a) and (b) which relate to matters within its jurisdiction or functions. Any Committee \4\ of the House of Representatives or the Senate that anticipates that the committee will consider any proposed legislation establishing, amending, or reauthorizing any Federal program likely to have a significant budgetary impact on any State, local, or tribal government, or likely to have a significant financial impact on the private sector, including any legislative proposal submitted by the executive branch likely to have such a budgetary or financial impact, shall include its views and estimates on that proposal to the Committee on the Budget of the applicable House. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \4\ So in original. Probably should not be capitalized. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- * * * * * committee allocations  Sec. 302. (a) Committee Spending Allocations.-- (1) Allocation among committees.--The joint explanatory statement accompanying a conference report on a concurrent resolution on the budget shall include an allocation, consistent with the resolution recommended in the conference report, of the levels for the first fiscal year of the resolution, for at least each of the ensuing 4 fiscal years, and a total for that period of fiscal years (except in the case of the Committee on Appropriations only for the fiscal year of that resolution) of-- (A) total new budget authority; and (B) total outlays; among each Committee of the House of Representatives or the Senate that has jurisdiction over legislation providing or creating such amounts. (2) No double counting.--In the House of Representatives, any item allocated to one committee may not be allocated to another committee. (3) Further division of amounts.-- (A) In the senate.--In the Senate, the amount allocated to the Committee on Appropriations shall be further divided among the categories specified in section 250(c)(4)  of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 and shall not exceed the limits for each category set forth in section 251(c)  of that Act. (B) In the house.--In the House of Representatives, the amounts allocated to each committee for each fiscal year, other than the Committee on Appropriations, shall be further divided between amounts provided or required by law on the date of filing of that conference report and amounts not so provided or required. The amounts allocated to the Committee on Appropriations shall be further divided-- (i) between discretionary and mandatory amounts or programs, as appropriate; and (ii) consistent with the categories specified in section 250(c)(4)  of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of1985. (4) Amounts not allocated.--In the House of Representatives or the Senate, if a committee receives no allocation of new budget authority or outlays, that committee shall be deemed to have received an allocation equal to zero for new budget authority or outlays. (5) Adjusting allocation of discretionary spending in the house of representatives.--(A) If a concurrent resolution on the budget is not adopted by April 15, the chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the House of Representatives shall submit to the House, as soon as practicable, an allocation under paragraph (1) to the Committee on Appropriations consistent with the discretionary spending levels in the most recently agreed to concurrent resolution on the budget for the appropriate fiscal year covered by that resolution. (B) As soon as practicable after an allocation under paragraph (1) is submitted under this section, the Committee on Appropriations shall make suballocations and report those suballocations to the House of Representatives. (b) Suballocations by Appropriations Committees.--As soon as practicable after a concurrent resolution on the budget is agreed to, the Committee on Appropriations of each House (after consulting with the Committee on Appropriations of the other House) shall suballocate each amount allocated to it for the budget year under subsection (a) among its subcommittees. Each Committee on Appropriations shall promptly report to its House suballocations made or revised under this subsection. The Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives shall further divide among its subcommittees the divisions made under subsection (a)(3)(B) and promptly report those divisions to the House. (c) Point of Order.--After the Committee on Appropriations has received an allocation pursuant to subsection (a) for a fiscal year, it shall not be in order in the House of Representatives or the Senate to consider any bill, joint resolution, amendment, motion, or conference report within the jurisdiction of that committee providing new budget authority for that fiscal year, until that committee makes the suballocations required by subsection (b). (d) Subsequent Concurrent Resolutions.--In the case of a concurrent resolution on the budget referred to in section 635 of this title, the allocations under subsection (a) and the subdivisions under subsection (b) shall be required only to the extent necessary to take into account revisions made in the most recently agreed to concurrent resolution on the budget. * * * * * (f) Legislation Subject to Point of Order.-- (1) In the house of representatives.--After the Congress has completed action on a concurrent resolution on the budget for a fiscal year, it shall not be in order in the House of Representatives to consider any bill, joint resolution, or amendment providing new budget authority for any fiscal year, or any conference report on any such bill or joint resolution, if-- (A) the enactment of such bill or resolution as reported; (B) the adoption and enactment of such amendment; or (C) the enactment of such bill or resolution in the form recommended in such conference report, would cause the applicable allocation of new budget authority made under subsection (a) or (b) of this section for the first fiscal year or the total of fiscal years to be exceeded. * * * * * concurrent resolution on the budget must be adopted before budget-related legislation is considered  Sec. 303. (a) In General.--Until the concurrent resolution on the budget for a fiscal year has been agreed to, it shall not be in order in the House of Representatives, with respect to the first fiscal year covered by that resolution, or the Senate, with respect to any fiscal year covered by that resolution, to consider any bill or joint resolution, amendment or motion thereto, or conference report thereon that-- (1) first provides new budget authority for that fiscal year; (2) first provides an increase or decrease in revenues during that fiscal year; (3) provides an increase or decrease in the public debt limit to become effective during that fiscal year; (4) in the Senate only, first provides new entitlement authority for that fiscal year; or (5) in the Senate only, first provides for an increase or decrease in outlays for that fiscal year. (b) Exceptions in the House.--In the House of Representatives, subsection (a) of this section does not apply-- (1)(A) to any bill or joint resolution, as reported, providing advance discretionary new budget authority that first becomes available for the first or second fiscal year after the budget year; or (B) to any bill or joint resolution, as reported, first increasing or decreasing revenues in a fiscal year following the fiscal year to which the concurrent resolution applies; (2) after May 15, to any general appropriation bill or amendment thereto; or (3) to any bill or joint resolution unless it is reported by a committee. * * * * * permissible revisions of concurrent resolutions on the budget  Sec. 304. At any time after the concurrent resolution on the budget for a fiscal year has been agreed to pursuant to section 632 of this title, and before the end of such fiscal year, the two Houses may adopt a concurrent resolution on the budget which revises or reaffirms the concurrent resolution on the budget for such fiscal year most recently agreed to.  provisions relating to the consideration of concurrent resolutions on the budget  Sec. 305. (a) Procedure in House After Report of Committee; Debate.-- (1) When a concurrent resolution on the budget has been reported by the Committee on the Budget of the House of Representatives and has been referred to the appropriate calendar of the House, it shall be in order on any day thereafter, subject to clause 4 of rule XIII of the Rules of the House of Representatives, to move to proceed to the consideration of the concurrent resolution. The motion is highly privileged and is not debatable. An amendment to the motion is not in order and it is not in order to move to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to. * * * * * house committee action on all appropriation bills to be completed by june 10  Sec. 307. On or before June 10 of each year, the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives shall report annual appropriation bills providing new budget authority under the jurisdiction of all of its subcommittees for the fiscal year which begins on October 1 of that year.  reports, summaries, and projections of congressional budget actions  Sec. 308. (a) Legislation Providing New Budget Authority or Providing Increase or Decrease in Revenues or Tax Expenditures.-- (1) Whenever a committee of either House reports to its House a bill or joint resolution, or committee amendment thereto, providing new budget authority (other than continuing appropriations) or providing an increase or decrease in revenues or tax expenditures for a fiscal year (or fiscal years), the report accompanying that bill or joint resolution shall contain a statement, or the committee shall make available such a statement in the case of an approved committee amendment which is not reported to its House, prepared after consultation with the Director of the Congressional Budget Office-- (A) comparing the levels in such measure to the appropriate allocations in the reports submitted under section 302(b)  for the most recently agreed to concurrent resolution on the budget for such fiscal year (or fiscal years); (B) containing a projection by the Congressional Budget Office of how such measure will affect the levels of such budget authority, budget outlays, revenues, or tax expenditures under existing law for such fiscal year (or fiscal years) and each of the four ensuing fiscal years, if timely submitted before such report is filed; and (C) containing an estimate by the Congressional Budget Office of the level of new budget authority for assistance to State and local governments provided by such measure, if timely submitted before such report is filed. (2) Whenever a conference report is filed in either House and such conference report or any amendment reported in disagreement or any amendment contained in the joint statement of managers to be proposed by the conferees in the case of technical disagreement on such bill or joint resolution provides new budget authority (other than continuing appropriations) or provides an increase or decrease in revenues for a fiscal year (or fiscal years), the statement of managers accompanying such conference report shall contain the information described in paragraph (1), if available on a timely basis. If such information is not available when the conference report is filed, the committee shall make such information available to Members as soon as practicable prior to the consideration of such conference report. * * * * * reconciliation  Sec. 310. (a) Inclusion of Reconciliation Directives in Concurrent Resolutions on the Budget.--A concurrent resolution on the budget for any fiscal year, to the extent necessary to effectuate the provisions and requirements of such resolution, shall-- (1) specify the total amount by which-- (A) new budget authority for such fiscal year; (B) budget authority initially provided for prior fiscal years; (C) new entitlement authority which is to become effective during such fiscal year; and (D) credit authority for such fiscal year, contained in laws, bills, and resolutions within the jurisdiction of a committee, is to be changed and direct that committee to determine and recommend changes to accomplish a change of such total amount; (2) specify the total amount by which revenues are to be changed and direct that the committees having jurisdiction to determine and recommend changes in the revenue laws, bills, and resolutions to accomplish a change of such total amount; (3) specify the amounts by which the statutory limit on the public debt is to be changed and direct the committee having jurisdiction to recommend such change; or (4) specify and direct any combination of the matters described in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) (including a direction to achieve deficit reduction). (b) Legislative Procedure.--If a concurrent resolution containing directives to one or more committees to determine and recommend changes in laws, bills, or resolutions is agreed to in accordance with subsection (a), and-- (1) only one committee of the House or the Senate is directed to determine and recommend changes, that committee shall promptly make such determination and recommendations and report to its House reconciliation legislation containing such recommendations; or (2) more than one committee of the House or the Senate is directed to determine and recommend changes, each such committee so directed shall promptly make such determination and recommendations and submit such recommendations to the Committee on the Budget of its House, which, upon receiving all such recommendations, shall report to its House reconciliation legislation carrying out all such recommendations without any substantive revision. For purposes of this subsection, a reconciliation resolution is a concurrent resolution directing the Clerk of the House of Representatives or the Secretary of the Senate, as the case may be, to make specified changes in bills and resolutions which have not been enrolled. (c) Compliance With Reconciliation Directions.-- (1) Any committee of the House of Representatives or the Senate that is directed, pursuant to a concurrent resolution on the budget, to determine and recommend changes of the type described in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (a) with respect to laws within its jurisdiction, shall be deemed to have complied with such directions-- (A) if-- (i) the amount of the changes of the type described in paragraph (1) of such subsection recommended by such committee do not exceed or fall below the amount of the changes such committee was directed by such concurrent resolution to recommend under that paragraph by more than-- (I) in the Senate, 20 percent of the total of the amounts of the changes such committee was directed to make under paragraphs (1) and (2) of such subsection; or (II) in the House of Representatives, 20 percent of the sum of the absolute value of the changes the committee was directed to make under paragraph (1) and the absolute value of the changes the committee was directed to make under paragraph (2); and (ii) the amount of the changes of the type described in paragraph (2) of such subsection recommended by such committee do not exceed or fall below the amount of the changes such committee was directed by such concurrent resolution to recommend under hat paragraph by more than-- (I) in the Senate, 20 percent of the total of the amounts of the changes such committee was directed to make under paragraphs (1) and (2) of such subsection; or (II) in the House of Representatives, 20 percent of the sum of the absolute value of the changes the committee was directed to make under paragraph (1) and the absolute value of the changes the committee was directed to make under paragraph (2); and (B) if the total amount of the changes recommended by such committee is not less than the total of the amounts of the changes such committee was directed to make under paragraphs (1) and (2) of such subsection. (2)(A) Upon the reporting to the Committee on the Budget of the Senate of a recommendation that shall be deemed to have complied with such directions solely by virtue of this subsection, the chairman of that committee may file with the Senate appropriately revised allocations under section 302(a)  and revised functional levels and aggregates to carry out this subsection. (B) Upon the submission to the Senate of a conference report recommending a reconciliation bill or resolution in which a committee shall be deemed to have complied with such directions solely by virtue of this subsection, the chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate may file with the Senate appropriately revised allocations under section 302(a)  and revised functional levels and aggregates to carry out this subsection. * * * * * budget-related legislation must be within appropriate levels  Sec. 311. (a) Enforcement of Budget Aggregates.-- (1) In house of representatives.--Except as provided by subsection (c), after the Congress has completed action on a concurrent resolution on the budget for a fiscal year, it shall not be in order in the House of Representatives to consider any bill, joint resolution, amendment, motion, or conference report providing new budget authority or reducing revenues, if-- (A) the enactment of that bill or resolution as reported; (B) the adoption and enactment of that amendment; or (C) the enactment of that bill or resolution in the form recommended in that conference report; would cause the level of total new budget authority or total outlays set forth in the applicable concurrent resolution on the budget for the first fiscal year to be exceeded, or would cause revenues to be less than the level of total revenues set forth in that concurrent resolution for the first fiscal year or for the total of that first fiscal year and the ensuing fiscal years for which allocations are provided under section 302(a) , except when a declaration of war by the Congress is in effect. (2) In senate.--After a concurrent resolution on the budget is agreed to, it shall not be in order in the Senate to consider any bill, joint resolution, amendment, motion, or conference report that-- (A) would cause the level of total new budget authority or total outlays set forth for the first fiscal year in the applicable resolution to be exceeded; or (B) would cause revenues to be less than the level of total revenues set forth for that first fiscal year or for the total of that first fiscal year and the ensuing fiscal years in the applicable resolution for which allocations are provided under section 302(a) . * * * * * (c) Exception in House of Representatives.--Subsection (a)(1) shall not apply in the House of Representatives to any bill, joint resolution, or amendment that provides new budget authority for a fiscal year or to any conference report on any such bill or resolution, if-- (1) the enactment of that bill or resolution as reported; (2) the adoption and enactment of that amendment; or (3) the enactment of that bill or resolution in the form recommended in that conference report; would not cause the appropriate allocation of new budget authority made pursuant to section 302(a)  for that fiscal year to be exceeded. * * * * * determinations and points of order  Sec. 312. (a) Budget Committee Determinations.--For purposes of this subchapter and subchapter II, the levels of new budget authority, outlays, direct spending, new entitlement authority, and revenues for a fiscal year shall be determined on the basis of estimates made by the Committee on the Budget of the House of Representatives or the Senate, as applicable. * * * * * TITLE IV--FISCAL PROCEDURES  Part A--General Provisions budget-related legislation not subject to appropriations  Sec. 401. (a) Controls on Certain Budget-related Legislation Not Subject to Appropriations.--It shall not be in order in either the House of Representatives or the Senate to consider any bill or joint resolution (in the House of Representatives only, as reported), amendment, motion, or conference report that provides-- (1) new authority to enter into contracts under which the United States is obligated to make outlays; (2) new authority to incur indebtedness (other than indebtedness incurred under chapter 31 of title 31) for the repayment of which the United States is liable; or (3) new credit authority; unless that bill, joint resolution, amendment, motion, or conference report also provides that the new authority is to be effective for any fiscal year only to the extent or in the amounts provided in advance in appropriation Acts. (b) Legislation Providing New Entitlement Authority.-- (1) Point of order.--It shall not be in order in either the House of Representatives or the Senate to consider any bill or joint resolution (in the House of Representatives only, as reported), amendment, motion, or conference report that provides new entitlement authority that is to become effective during the current fiscal year. (2) If any committee of the House of Representatives or the Senate reports any bill or resolution which provides new entitlement authority which is to become effective during a fiscal year and the amount of new budget authority which will be required for such fiscal year if such bill or resolution is enacted as so reported exceeds the appropriate allocation of new budget authority reported under section 302(b)  in connection with the most recently agreed to concurrent resolution on the budget for such fiscal year, such bill or resolution shall then be referred to the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate or may then be referred to the Committee on Appropriations of the House, as the case may be, with instructions to report it, with the committee's recommendations, within 15 calendar days (not counting any day on which that House is not in session) beginning with the day following the day on which it is so referred. If the Committee on Appropriations of either House fails to report a bill or resolution referred to it under this paragraph within such 15-day period, the committee shall automatically be discharged from further consideration of such bill or resolution and such bill or resolution shall be placed on the appropriate calendar. (3) The Committee on Appropriations of each House shall have jurisdiction to report any bill or resolution referred to it under paragraph (2) with an amendment which limits the total amount of new spending authority provided in such bill or resolution. (c) Exceptions.-- (1) Subsections (a) and (b) shall not apply to new authority described in those subsections if outlays from that new authority  \5\ flow-- --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \5\ Paragraph (4)(A) of section 10116(a) of Public Law 105-33 amended this provision as shown above. However, the word ``will'' probably should have appeared in the matter proposed to be stricken by that public law. (A) from a trust fund established by the Social Security Act (as in effect on July 12, 1974 ); or (B) from any other trust fund, 90 percent or more of the receipts of which consist or will consist of amounts (transferred from the general fund of the Treasury) equivalent to amounts of taxes (related to the purposes for which such outlays are or will be made) received in the Treasury under specified provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 . (2) Subsections (a) and (b) shall not apply to new authority described in those subsections to the extent that-- (A) the outlays resulting therefrom are made by an organization which is (i) a mixed-ownership Government corporation (as defined in section 201  of the Government Corporation Control Act), or (ii) a wholly owned Government corporation (as defined in section 101  of such Act) which is specifically exempted by law from compliance with any or all of the provisions of that Act, as of December 12, 1985 ; or (B) the outlays resulting therefrom consist exclusively of the proceeds of gifts or bequests made to the United States for a specific purpose. * * * * * analysis by congressional budget office  Sec. 402. The Director of the Congressional Budget Office shall, to the extent practicable, prepare for each bill or resolution of a public character reported by any committee of the House of Representatives or the Senate (except the Committee on Appropriations of each House), and submit to such committee-- (1) an estimate of the costs which would be incurred in carrying out such bill or resolution in the fiscal year in which it is to become effective and in each of the 4 fiscal years following such fiscal year, together with the basis for each such estimate; (2) a comparison of the estimates of costs described in paragraph (1) with any available estimates of costs made by such committee or by any Federal agency; and (3) a description of each method for establishing a Federal financial commitment contained in such bill or resolution. The estimates, comparison, and description so submitted shall be included in the report accompanying such bill or resolution if timely submitted to such committee before such report is filed.  * * * * * study by the government accountability office of forms of federal financial commitment not reviewed annually by congress  Sec. 404. The Government Accountability Office shall study those provisions of law which provide mandatory spending and report to the Congress its recommendations for the appropriate form of financing for activities or programs financed by such provisions not later than eighteen months after December 12, 1985. Such report shall be revised from time to time.  off-budget agencies, programs, and activities  Sec. 405. (a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, budget authority, credit authority, and estimates of outlays and receipts for activities of the Federal budget which are off-budget immediately prior to December 12, 1985, not including activities of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and Federal Disability Insurance Trust Funds, shall be included in a budget submitted pursuant to section 1105 of title 31 and in a concurrent resolution on the budget reported pursuant to section 301  or section 304  and shall be considered, for purposes of this Act, budget authority, outlays, and spending authority in accordance with definitions set forth in this Act. (b) All receipts and disbursements of the Federal Financing Bank with respect to any obligations which are issued, sold, or guaranteed by a Federal agency shall be treated as a means of financing such agency for purposes of section 1105 of title 31, and for purposes of this Act.  member user group  Sec. 406. The Speaker of the House of Representatives, after consulting with the Minority Leader of the House, may appoint a Member User Group for the purpose of reviewing budgetary scorekeeping rules and practices of the House and advising the Speaker from time to time on the effect and impact of such rules and practices.  * * * * * Part B--Federal Mandates definitions  Sec. 421. Definitions.--For purposes of this part: (1) Agency.--The term ``agency'' has the same meaning as defined in section 551(1) of title 5, but does not include independent regulatory agencies. (2) Amount.--The term ``amount'', with respect to an authorization of appropriations for Federal financial assistance, means the amount of budget authority for any Federal grant assistance program or any Federal program providing loan guarantees or direct loans. (3) Direct costs.--The term ``direct costs''-- (A)(i) in the case of a Federal intergovernmental mandate, means the aggregate estimated amounts that all State, local, and tribal governments would be required to spend or would be prohibited from raising in revenues in order to comply with the Federal intergovernmental mandate; or (ii) in the case of a provision referred to in paragraph (5)(A)(ii), means the amount of Federal financial assistance eliminated or reduced; (B) in the case of a Federal private sector mandate, means the aggregate estimated amounts that the private sector will be required to spend in order to comply with the Federal private sector mandate; (C) shall be determined on the assumption that-- (i) State, local, and tribal governments, and the private sector will take all reasonable steps necessary to mitigate the costs resulting from the Federal mandate, and will comply with applicable standards of practice and conduct established by recog- nized professional or trade associations; and (ii) reasonable steps to mitigate the costs shall not include increases in State, local, or tribal taxes or fees; and (D) shall not include-- (i) estimated amounts that the State, local, and tribal govern- ments (in the case of a Federal intergovernmental mandate) or the private sector (in the case of a Federal private sector mandate) would spend-- (I) to comply with or carry out all applicable Federal, State, local, and tribal laws and regulations in effect at the time of the adoption of the Federal mandate for the same activity as is affected by that Federal mandate; or (II) to comply with or carry out State, local, and tribal govern- mental programs, or private-sector business or other activities in effect at the time of the adoption of the Federal mandate for the same activity as is affected by that mandate; or (ii) expenditures to the extent that such expenditures will be offset by any direct savings to the State, local, and tribal govern- ments, or by the private sector, as a result of-- (I) compliance with the Federal mandate; or (II) other changes in Federal law or regulation that are enacted or adopted in the same bill or joint resolution or proposed or final Federal regulation and that govern the same activity as is affected by the Federal mandate. (4) Direct savings.--The term ``direct savings'', when used with respect to the result of compliance with the Federal mandate-- (A) in the case of a Federal intergovernmental mandate, means the aggregate estimated reduction in costs to any State, local, or tribal government as a result of compliance with the Federal intergovernmental mandate; and (B) in the case of a Federal private sector mandate, means the aggregate estimated reduction in costs to the private sector as a result of compliance with the Federal private sector mandate. (5) Federal intergovernmental mandate.--The term ``Federal intergovernmental mandate'' means-- (A) any provision in legislation, statute, or regulation that-- (i) would impose an enforceable duty upon State, local, or tribal governments, except-- (I) a condition of Federal assistance; or (II) a duty arising from participation in a voluntary Federal program, except as provided in subparagraph (B); or (ii) would reduce or eliminate the amount of authorization of appropriations for-- (I) Federal financial assistance that would be provided to State, local, or tribal governments for the purpose of complying with any such previously imposed duty unless such duty is reduced or eliminated by a corresponding amount; or (II) the control of borders by the Federal Government; or reimbursement to State, local, or tribal governments for the net cost associated with illegal, deportable, and excludable aliens, including court-mandated expenses related to emergency health care, education or criminal justice; when such a reduction or elimination would result in increased net costs to State, local, or tribal governments in providing education or emergency health care to, or incarceration of, illegal aliens; except that this subclause shall not be in effect with respect to a State, local, or tribal government, to the extent that such government has not fully cooperated in the efforts of the Federal Government to locate, apprehend, and deport illegal aliens; (B) any provision in legislation, statute, or regulation that relates to a then-existing Federal program under which $500,000,000 or more is provided annually to State, local, and tribal governments under entitlement authority, if the provision-- (i)(I) would increase the stringency of conditions of assistance to State, local, or tribal governments under the program; or (II) would place caps upon, or otherwise decrease, the Federal Government's responsibility to provide funding to State, local, or tribal governments under the program; and (ii) the State, local, or tribal governments that participate in the Federal program lack authority under that program to amend their financial or programmatic responsibilities to continue prov- iding required services that are affected by the legislation, statute, or regulation. (6) Federal mandate.--The term ``Federal mandate'' means a Federal intergovernmental mandate or a Federal private sector mandate, as defined in paragraphs (5) and (7). (7) Federal private sector mandate.--The term ``Federal private sector mandate'' means any provision in legislation, statute, or regulation that-- (A) would impose an enforceable duty upon the private sector except-- (i) a condition of Federal assistance; or (ii) a duty arising from participation in a voluntary Federal program; or (B) would reduce or eliminate the amount of authorization of appropriations for Federal financial assistance that will be provided to the private sector for the purposes of ensuring compliance with such duty. (8) Local government.--The term ``local government'' has the same meaning as defined in section 6501(6) of title 31. (9) Private sector.--The term ``private sector'' means all persons or entities in the United States, including individuals, partnerships, associations, corporations, and educational and nonprofit institutions, but shall not include State, local, or tribal governments. (10) Regulation; rule.--The term ``regulation'' or ``rule'' (except with respect to a rule of either House of the Congress) has the meaning of ``rule'' as defined in section 601(2) of title 5. (11) Small government.--The term ``small government'' means any small governmental jurisdictions defined in section 601(5) of title 5, and any tribal government. (12) State.--The term ``State'' has the same meaning as defined in section 6501(9) of title 31. (13) Tribal government.--The term ``tribal government'' means any Indian tribe, band, nation, or other organized group or community, including any Alaska Native village or regional or village corporation as defined in or established pursuant to the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (85 Stat. 688; 43 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.) which is recognized as eligible for the special programs and services provided by the United States to Indians because of their special status as Indians. exclusions  Sec. 422. Exclusions. This part shall not apply to any provision in a bill, joint resolution, amendment, motion, or conference report before Congress that-- (1) enforces constitutional rights of individuals; (2) establishes or enforces any statutory rights that prohibit discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, handicap, or disability; (3) requires compliance with accounting and auditing procedures with respect to grants or other money or property provided by the Federal Government; (4) provides for emergency assistance or relief at the request of any State, local, or tribal government or any official of a State, local, or tribal government; (5) is necessary for the national security or the ratification or implementation of international treaty obligations; (6) the President designates as emergency legislation and that the Congress so designates in statute; or (7) relates to the old-age, survivors, and disability insurance program under title II of the Social Security Act  (including taxes imposed by sections 3101(a) and 3111(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to old-age, survivors, and disability insurance). duties of congressional committees  Sec. 423. Duties of Congressional Committees.-- (a) In General.--When a committee of authorization of the Senate or the House of Representatives reports a bill or joint resolution of public character that includes any Federal mandate, the report of the committee accompanying the bill or joint resolution shall contain the information required by subsections (c) and (d). (b) Submission of Bills to Director.--When a committee of authorization of the Senate or the House of Representatives orders reported a bill or joint resolution of a public character, the committee shall promptly provide the bill or joint resolution to the Director of the Congressional Budget Office and shall identify to the Director any Federal mandates contained in the bill or resolution. (c) Reports on Federal Mandates.--Each report described under subsection (a) shall contain-- (1) an identification and description of any Federal mandates in the bill or joint resolution, including the direct costs to State, local, and tribal governments, and to the private sector, required to comply with the Federal mandates; (2) a qualitative, and if practicable, a quantitative assessment of costs and benefits anticipated from the Federal mandates (including the effects on health and safety and the protection of the natural environment); and (3) a statement of the degree to which a Federal mandate affects both the public and private sectors and the extent to which Federal payment of public sector costs or the modification or termination of the Federal mandate as provided under section 425(a)(2)  would affect the competitive balance between State, local, or tribal governments and the private sector including a description of the actions, if any, taken by the committee to avoid any adverse impact on the private sector or the competitive balance between the public sector and the private sector. (d) Intergovernmental Mandates.--If any of the Federal mandates in the bill or joint resolution are Federal intergovernmental mandates, the report required under subsection (a) shall also contain-- (1)(A) a statement of the amount, if any, of increase or decrease in authorization of appropriations under existing Federal financial assistance programs, or of authorization of appropriations for new Federal financial assistance, provided by the bill or joint resolution and usable for activities of State, local, or tribal governments subject to the Federal intergovernmental mandates; (B) a statement of whether the committee intends that the Federal intergovernmental mandates be partly or entirely unfunded, and if so, the reasons for that intention; and (C) if funded in whole or in part, a statement of whether and how the committee has created a mechanism to allocate the funding in a manner that is reasonably consistent with the expected direct costs among and between the respective levels of State, local, and tribal government; and (2) any existing sources of Federal assistance in addition to those identified in paragraph (1) that may assist State, local, and tribal governments in meeting the direct costs of the Federal intergovernmental mandates; \6\ and --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \6\ Subsection (d)(3) was added by Pub. L. 106-141  2(a). --------------------------------------------------------------------------- (3) if the bill or joint resolution would make the reduction specified in section 421(5)(B)(i)(II) , a statement of how the committee specifically intends the States to implement the reduction and to what extent the legislation provides additional flexibility, if any, to offset the reduction. (e) Preemption Clarification and Information.--When a committee of authorization of the Senate or the House of Representatives reports a bill or joint resolution of public character, the committee report accompanying the bill or joint resolution shall contain, if relevant to the bill or joint resolution, an explicit statement on the extent to which the bill or joint resolution is intended to preempt any State, local, or tribal law, and, if so, an explanation of the effect of such preemption. (f) Publication of Statement From Director.-- (1) In general.--Upon receiving a statement from the Director under section 424 , a committee of the Senate or the House of Representatives shall publish the statement in the committee report accompanying the bill or joint resolution to which the statement relates if the statement is available at the time the report is printed. (2) Other publication of statement of director.--If the statement is not published in the report, or if the bill or joint resolution to which the statement relates is expected to be considered by the Senate or the House of Representatives before the report is published, the committee shall cause the statement, or a summary thereof, to be published in the Congressional Record in advance of floor consideration of the bill or joint resolution. duties of director; statements on bills and joint resolutions other than appropriations bills and joint resolutions  Sec. 424. Duties of Director; Statements on Bills and Joint Resolutions Other Than Appropriations Bills and Joint Resolutions.-- (a) Federal Intergovernmental Mandates in Reported Bills and Resolutions.--For each bill or joint resolution of a public character reported by any committee of authorization of the Senate or the House of Representatives, the Director of the Congressional Budget Office shall prepare and submit to the committee a statement as follows: (1) Contents.--If the Director estimates that the direct cost of all Federal intergovernmental mandates in the bill or joint resolution will equal or exceed $50,000,000 (adjusted annually for inflation) in the fiscal year in which any Federal intergovernmental mandate in the bill or joint resolution (or in any necessary implementing regulation) would first be effective or in any of the 4 fiscal years following such fiscal year, the Director shall so state, specify the estimate, and briefly explain the basis of the estimate. (2) Estimates.--Estimates required under paragraph (1) shall include estimates (and brief explanations of the basis of the estimates) of-- (A) the total amount of direct cost of complying with the Federal intergovernmental mandates in the bill or joint resolution; (B) if the bill or resolution contains an authorization of appro- priations under section 425(a)(2)(B) , the amount of new budget authority for each fiscal year for a period not to exceed 10 years beyond the effective date necessary for the direct cost of the intergovernmental mandate; and (C) the amount, if any, of increase in authorization of appropria- tions under existing Federal financial assistance programs, or of authorization of appropriations for new Federal financial assistance, provided by the bill or joint resolution and usable by State, local, or tribal governments for activities subject to the Federal intergov ernmental mandates.\7\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \7\ Subsection (a)(3) was redesignated as (a)(4) and the new (a)(3) was added by Pub. L. 106-141,  2(a). (3) Additional flexibility information.--The Director shall include in the statement submitted under this subsection, in the case of legislation that makes changes as described in section --------------------------------------------------------------------------- 421(5)(B)(i)(II) -- (A) if no additional flexibility is provided in the legislation, a description of whether and how the States can offset the reduction under existing law; or (B) if additional flexibility is provided in the legislation, whether the resulting savings would offset the reductions in that program assuming the States fully implement that additional flexibility. (4) Estimate not feasible.--If the Director determines that it is not feasible to make a reasonable estimate that would be required under paragraphs (1) and (2), the Director shall not make the estimate, but shall report in the statement that the reasonable estimate cannot be made and shall include the reasons for that determination in the statement. If such determination is made by the Director, a point of order under this part shall lie only under section 425(a)(1)  and as if the requirement of section 425(a)(1)  had not been met. (b) Federal Private Sector Mandates in Reported Bills and Joint Resolutions.--For each bill or joint resolution of a public character reported by any committee of authorization of the Senate or the House of Representatives, the Director of the Congressional Budget Office shall prepare and submit to the committee a statement as follows: (1) Contents.--If the Director estimates that the direct cost of all Federal private sector mandates in the bill or joint resolution will equal or exceed $100,000,000 (adjusted annually for inflation) in the fiscal year in which any Federal private sector mandate in the bill or joint resolution (or in any necessary implementing regulation) would first be effective or in any of the 4 fiscal years following such fiscal year, the Director shall so state, specify the estimate, and briefly explain the basis of the estimate. (2) Estimates.--Estimates required under paragraph (1) shall include estimates (and a brief explanation of the basis of the estimates) of-- (A) the total amount of direct costs of complying with the Federal private sector mandates in the bill or joint resolution; and (B) the amount, if any, of increase in authorization of appropria- tions under existing Federal financial assistance programs, or of authorization of appropriations for new Federal financial assistance, provided by the bill or joint resolution usable by the private sector for the activities subject to the Federal private sector man- dates. (3) Estimate not feasible.--If the Director determines that it is not feasible to make a reasonable estimate that would be required under paragraphs (1) and (2), the Director shall not make the estimate, but shall report in the statement that the reasonable estimate cannot be made and shall include the reasons for that determination in the statement. (c) Legislation Falling Below Direct Costs Thresholds.--If the Director estimates that the direct costs of a Federal mandate will not equal or exceed the thresholds specified in subsections (a) and (b), the Director shall so state and shall briefly explain the basis of the estimate. (d) Amended Bills and Joint Resolutions; Conference Reports.--If a bill or joint resolution is passed in an amended form (including if passed by one House as an amendment in the nature of a substitute for the text of a bill or joint resolution from the other House) or is reported by a committee of conference in amended form, and the amended form contains a Federal mandate not previously considered by either House or which contains an increase in the direct cost of a previously considered Federal mandate, then the committee of conference shall ensure, to the greatest extent practicable, that the Director shall prepare a statement as provided in this subsection or a supplemental statement for the bill or joint resolution in that amended form. legislation subject to point of order  Sec. 425. Legislation Subject to Point of Order.-- (a) In General.--It shall not be in order in the Senate or the House of Representatives to consider-- (1) any bill or joint resolution that is reported by a committee unless the committee has published a statement of the Director on the direct costs of Federal mandates in accordance with section section 423(f)  before such consideration, except this paragraph shall not apply to any supplemental statement prepared by the Director under section 424(d) ; and (2) any bill, joint resolution, amendment, motion, or conference report that would increase the direct costs of Federal intergovernmental mandates by an amount that causes the thresholds specified in section 424(a)(1)  to be exceeded, unless-- (A) the bill, joint resolution, amendment, motion, or conference report provides new budget authority or new entitlement authority in the House of Representatives or direct spending authority in the Senate for each fiscal year for such mandates included in the bill, joint resolution, amendment, motion, or conference report in an amount equal to or exceeding the direct costs of such man- date; or (B) the bill, joint resolution, amendment, motion, or conference report includes an authorization for appropriations in an amount equal to or exceeding the direct costs of such mandate, and-- (i) identifies a specific dollar amount of the direct costs of such mandate for each year up to 10 years during which such mandate shall be in effect under the bill, joint resolution, amend- ment, motion or conference report, and such estimate is con- sistent with the estimate determined under subsection (e) for each fiscal year; (ii) identifies any appropriation bill that is expected to provide for Federal funding of the direct cost referred to under clause (i); and (iii)(I) provides that for any fiscal year the responsible Federal agency shall determine whether there are insufficient appropria- tions for that fiscal year to provide for the direct costs under clause (i) of such mandate, and shall (no later than 30 days after the beginning of the fiscal year) notify the appropriate authorizing committees of Congress of the determination and submit either-- (aa) a statement that the agency has determined, based on a re-estimate of the direct costs of such mandate, after consultation with State, local, and tribal governments, that the amount appropriated is sufficient to pay for the direct costs of such mandate; or (bb) legislative recommendations for either implementing a less costly mandate or making such mandate ineffective for the fiscal year; (II) provides for expedited procedures for the consideration of the statement or legislative recommendations referred to in subclause (I) by Congress no later than 30 days after the state- ment or recommendations are submitted to Congress; and (III) provides that such mandate shall-- (aa) in the case of a statement referred to in subclause (I)(aa), cease to be effective 60 days after the statement is submitted unless Congress has approved the agency's deter mination by joint resolution during the 60-day period; (bb) cease to be effective 60 days after the date the legisla tive recommendations of the responsible Federal agency are submitted to Congress under subclause (I)(bb) unless Congress provides otherwise by law; or (cc) in the case that such mandate that has not yet taken effect, continue not to be effective unless Congress provides otherwise by law. (b) Rule of Construction.--The provisions of subsection (a)(2)(B)(iii) shall not be construed to prohibit or otherwise restrict a State, local, or tribal government from voluntarily electing to remain subject to the original Federal intergovernmental mandate, complying with the programmatic or financial responsibilities of the original Federal intergovernmental mandate and providing the funding necessary consistent with the costs of Federal agency assistance, monitoring, and enforcement. * * * * * provisions relating to house of representatives  Sec. 426. Provisions Relating to House of Representatives.-- (a) Enforcement in the House of Representatives.--It shall not be in order in the House of Representatives to consider a rule or order that waives the application of section 425 . (b) Disposition of Points of Order.-- (1) Application to house of representatives.--This subsection shall apply only to the House of Representatives. (2) Threshold burden.--In order to be cognizable by the Chair, a point of order under section 425  or subsection (a) of this section must specify the precise language on which it is premised. (3) Question of consideration.--As disposition of points of order under section 425  or subsection (a) of this section, the Chair shall put the question of consideration with respect to the proposition that is the subject of the points of order. (4) Debate and intervening motions.--A question of consideration under this section shall be debatable for 10 minutes by each Member initiating a point of order and for 10 minutes by an opponent on each point of order, but shall otherwise be decided without intervening motion except one that the House adjourn or that the Committee of the Whole rise, as the case may be. (5) Effect on amendment in order as original text.--The disposition of the question of consideration under this subsection with respect to a bill or joint resolution shall be considered also to determine the question of consideration under this subsection with respect to an amendment made in order as original text. * * * * * clarification of application  Sec. 428. Clarification of Application.-- (a) In General.--This part applies to any bill, joint resolution, amendment, motion, or conference report that reauthorizes appropriations, or that amends existing authorizations of appropriations, to carry out any statute, or that otherwise amends any statute, only if enactment of the bill, joint resolution, amendment, motion, or conference report-- (1) would result in a net reduction in or elimination of authorization of appropriations for Federal financial assistance that would be provided to State, local, or tribal governments for use for the purpose of complying with any Federal intergovernmental mandate, or to the private sector for use to comply with any Federal private sector mandate, and would not eliminate or reduce duties established by the Federal mandate by a corresponding amount; or (2) would result in a net increase in the aggregate amount of direct costs of Federal intergovernmental mandates or Federal private sector mandates other than as described in paragraph (1). (b) Direct Costs.-- (1) In general.--For purposes of this part, the direct cost of the Federal mandates in a bill, joint resolution, amendment, motion, or conference report that reauthorizes appropriations, or that amends existing authorizations of appropriations, to carry out a statute, or that otherwise amends any statute, means the net increase, resulting from enactment of the bill, joint resolution, amendment, motion, or conference report, in the amount described under paragraph (2)(A) over the amount described under paragraph (2)(B). (2) Amounts.--The amounts referred to under paragraph (1) are-- (A) the aggregate amount of direct costs of Federal mandates that would result under the statute if the bill, joint resolution, amendment, motion, or conference report is enacted; and (B) the aggregate amount of direct costs of Federal mandates that would result under the statute if the bill, joint resolution, amendment, motion, or conference report were not enacted. (3) Extension of authorization of appropriations.--For purposes of this section, in the case of legislation to extend authorization of appropriations, the authorization level that would be provided by the extension shall be compared to the authorization level for the last year in which authorization of appropriations is already provided. 