THE OLDER AMERICANS ACT:
SUPPORTING EFFORTS TO
MEET THE NEEDS OF SENIORS
----------
Thursday, March 7, 2024
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 11:03 a.m., in
room 430, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Bernard Sanders,
Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
Present: Senators Sanders , Casey, Baldwin,
Murphy, Kaine, Hassan, Smith, Hickenlooper, Markey, Cassidy,
Collins, Braun, and Marshall.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR SANDERS
The Chair. The Senate Committee on Health, Education,
Labor, and Pensions will come to order. Before we get to the
Older Americans Act, which is an issue of enormous consequence,
I just wanted to say a few words on--briefly on some of the
subjects.
First, as all of you know, this Committee has spent a lot
of time on the high cost of prescription drugs in America and
the fact that in some cases we pay ten times more for the same
products that people in other countries pay.
This Committee did an investigation an exhaustive
investigation on inhalers. Millions of people have asthma and
obesity, and it is very difficult for them to pay for the
products that they need.
During the last couple of weeks, among other things, I have
talked to the major manufacturers of those inhalers, or four
major ones. Two of them were receptive. Two of them not so
much.
But I am very happy to mention today that one of those
manufacturers, Boehringer Ingelheim, announced that it is
substantially lowering the cost of their inhalers in America by
making sure that every uninsured or underinsured patient in the
country will pay no more than $35 for those devices.
That is a big deal, and I very much appreciate the step
forward by Boehringer Ingelheim and we look forward to the
other manufacturers following suit. On another issue, I wanted
to tell you what all of you know, and that is the minibus that
was passed by the House yesterday and will soon, I expect, be
passed by the Senate contains new funding for community health
centers, the National Health Service Corps, and teaching health
centers.
These issues this Committee has worked hard on. The
community health center program will go up from $4 billion in
mandatory funding to $4.4 billion. The National Health Service
Corp will go up from $310 million in funding to $364. And the
teaching health center will go up from $126 million to $175
million.
Now, given the dysfunctionality of the U.S. Congress, these
are not insignificant steps forward. But given the crisis that
we face in primary health care, we are not accomplishing
anything near what we have got to do.
The system is completely broken. We waste enormous amounts
of money when people end up in the emergency room in a hospital
because they don't get the primary care they need. So, my point
is, I look forward very much to continuing the work that we
have begun on primary health care and seeing if we can do a bit
more in the remaining months ahead of us.
Let's get to the subject matter of the day, and that is the
Older Americans Act. According to the OECD, 23 percent of
seniors in America are living in poverty, compared to just 12
percent in Canada, and 9 percent in Germany, and 4.4 percent in
France. Further, one out of every four seniors in America is
trying to survive on an income of less than $15,000 a year, and
I am not quite sure how anybody can survive on $15,000 a year.
Today, we will be paying attention to the urgent unmet
needs of millions of seniors in America and what we should do
as a society to reduce the senior poverty rate, to reduce
hunger, and to improve the health and well-being of our parents
and grandparents, the people who helped build this country.
In America today, 12 million seniors are dealing with food
insecurity. Quite unbelievable, but true. Nearly a quarter of
our Nation's seniors are considered to be socially isolated, a
huge issue. And more than one out of every four seniors suffer
from falls, tragic falls, the leading cause of death from
injury among our elderly population.
Something we don't pay enough attention to. Nearly 95
percent of adults over the age of 60 have a chronic health
condition, and 80 percent have two or more chronic conditions
like high blood pressure, arthritis, and diabetes.
Seniors throughout our Country, particularly in rural
areas, lack the transportation they need to get to a doctor's
office, the grocery store, or the dentist. And that should not
be happening in the richest country in the history of the
world. In my view, both from a moral and from an economic
perspective, we cannot turn our backs on the millions and
millions of seniors who are hurting and who desperately need
our help today.
Here is the good news. The good news is we have a very
effective piece of legislation on the books to address the
urgent needs of vulnerable seniors, and that is the Older
Americans Act. And I want to thank all of our panelists and so
many people around the country who have worked so hard on that
piece of legislation.
The Older Americans Act provides Federal funding for many
essential services for our Nation's seniors, including helping
older adults live at home rather than end up in nursing homes.
Supporting our Nation's caregivers' activities to combat
loneliness and isolation, preventing disease, job training,
protections from abuse, and rides to the doctor's office and
grocery store.
Importantly, and this is maybe the main point of today,
about 45 percent of funding from the Older Americans Act is
used to provide meals to millions of frail and isolated seniors
through Meals on Wheels program and through congregate meal
programs at senior centers.
When we talk about the Older Americans Act, let's not
forget 45 percent of the funding goes to nutrition programs for
seniors who need them. And I suspect all of us have been to
senior centers and seen the effectiveness of the congregate
meal program and the Meals on Wheels program.
Let us be clear, this is a point that needs to be made over
and over again, these nutrition programs not only provide good
nutrition, but anyone who understands the Meals on Wheels
program knows that it is important it is not just the actual
meals. Literally it is somebody knocking on the door, saying
hello, asking how you are doing, breaking through the
isolation.
That is what Meals on Wheels program does, and we thank all
the volunteers who are involved in those efforts. But not only
does the Older Americans Act save lives and ease human
suffering, it saves money.
I am almost thinking, Senator Cassidy, that we should
change the name of this Committee to the prevention committee.
Because as a Nation, what we do is end up spending a fortune
after people end up in the emergency room, in the hospital,
rather than keeping them out of it.
We treat kids, we don't get the quality education they
need, and they end up in jail. So, we should be focusing on
prevention. That is certainly what the Older Americans Act is
about. If seniors do not get the nutrition they need and
seniors become malnourished, what happens to those seniors?
Well, if you are malnourished, by definition, you are going
to get sick more often than you should. If you are old and you
are sick, where do you end up? You are going to end up in the
emergency room. At great expense to Medicare and Medicaid, you
can end up in the hospital. A great expense to our health care
system.
Matter of fact, malnutrition among seniors today costs our
society over $50 billion each and every year, a rather an
incredible amount of money. The truth is, it makes a lot more
sense to provide adequate nutrition to frail seniors than to
spend money on preventable hospital costs.
In fact, and I love this number here, it costs less to feed
a senior, one senior, for an entire year through the Older
Americans Act than it does for a senior to spend one night in a
hospital. Feed a senior for a year or spend one night in a
hospital.
Well, I think it is a better idea to feed that senior.
Providing adequate nutrition to seniors, new services for
seniors also reduces the need for nursing home care. People
would rather stay at home than end up in nursing home--in
nursing homes, and that is what Meals on Wheels and other
programs do.
Bottom line is here, and what is of concern to this
Committee is since 2016, despite increased demand that a
massive increase in the number of seniors in America, funding
for the Older Americans Act has gone down by nearly 20 percent
after adjusting for inflation--20 percent in real dollars.
As a result, seniors who are desperate for nutrition food
are being put on waiting lists that can last for months. So, we
have a choice, either we are going to respond to the crises
facing seniors, adequately fund these programs, or we don't.
My strong hope is that we go forward and do the right
thing.
Senator Cassidy.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR CASSIDY
Senator Cassidy. Thank you, Chairman Sanders. And two
things about your opening comments. It is good that Boehringer
is going to offer those inhalers at $35, but we have learned is
that when the insulin providers say that they provided an
insulin at $35, pharmacy benefit managers wouldn't carry it.
I think it is incumbent upon us to say--to get our PBM
reform legislation, which we worked on a bipartisan basis in
this Committee, signed into law. And that is going to take not
just this Committee, but the entire Senate and the House
Republicans in the House is to collaborate.
We are not there yet, but anyone that can pick up a phone,
call, we need to get that done so that the benefits of that
actually occurs as merely being something which just wouldn't
it be nice, but it actually doesn't impact someone's life.
Second, just a typo and I am sure is an oversight, it is
good that we have increased the funding for the community
health centers. It is $4.27 billion, not $4.4, but it shows
what can happen when we actually work together with reasonable
numbers and try and make things happen, and that is when this
Committee is at its best.
Now returning to the Committee at hand and thank our
witnesses for being here. Really appreciate it. And one by
zoom, which I wonder why everybody isn't by zoom because that
would obviously be more efficient.
We are discussing the reauthorization of the Older
Americans Act, or the OAA, legislation empowering American
seniors to live healthy and independent lives in the settings
they choose the lifestyle they choose. One of our Members of
the panel just got her hair dramatically cut. Said it was a
celebration of her 66 birthday.
We see that seniors can live on the wild side. So, I just
want to kind of comment on that right off the bat.

Senator Cassidy. First enacted in 1965, the OAA provides
funding to support essential services to aging Americans
through nutrition--through programs such as nutrition,
caregiver support, and elder abuse prevention.
We have, historically in Congress, come together on a
bipartisan basis to reauthorize this, strengthen its support
for all seniors. Post-COVID, we need to look at and make sure
the programs that we are authorizing work. If they are not
working, improve them. And make sure that those scarce taxpayer
dollars are being put to maximum benefit.
How do we build on what works? Replace that which does not.
During the pandemic, OAA service providers had to adapt, and I
would tour many of those places seeing how are you doing it
differently.
My gosh, they were quick on it. We should take lessons
learned during the pandemic and use that new knowledge as how
we can better serve those whom we intend to serve. The OAA is a
foundation, but it was never meant to meet all needs and we
have to be clear about that.
It is also important to understand how to use public
private, partnerships to leverage this funding to expand
services beyond the reach of this funding. Today, we will hear
about some of those partnerships. Again, thank you for being
here. Maximizing the reach of these dollars requires strong
organizations on the state and local level.
We appropriate. It has to be implemented on the state and
local level. So how do we support those state units and those
local units to maximize their effect? One of our witnesses
today, Secretary Michelle Branham, will speak to us about how
she has successfully done this in Florida, which I think has
one of our old--one of our--probably the largest population of
seniors.
She is looking at me. She is making sure that I don't diss
Maine. I understand that Maine has got a lot of seniors.
Believe me, I know Senator Collins. But anyway, Florida has
just got a bigger population than you. You got to walk a
tightrope around here, you know what I am saying.

Senator Cassidy. This year, the HELP Committee will need to
pass legislation reauthorizing the program, and I am glad to
join Chair Sanders in leading a bipartisan working group with
Senators Collins, Braun, Mullin, Casey, Kaine, and Markey.
With this group, with our stakeholders, we are going to
come forward with a bipartisan reauthorization, improving the
lives of all of those who we call senior citizens. I appreciate
the Chair for engaging. I look forward to hearing from you.
The Chair. Thank you, Senator Cassidy. We have a wonderful
panel. Our first witness is Ms. Ramsey Alwin, the President and
CEO of the National Council on Aging.
The National Council on Aging has been a national voice and
advocate for older adults since 1950 and provides resources and
advocacy to ensure that every person can age with health and
financial security.
Ms. Alwin, thank you so much for being with us.
STATEMENT OF RAMSEY ALWIN, PRESIDENT AND CEO,
NATIONAL COUNCIL ON AGING, ARLINGTON, VA
Ms. Alwin. Thank you for having us. And thank you to the
Chairman and Ranking Member for your support, your leadership
on this important topic today, and the bipartisan workgroup
that you have initiated together.
We greatly appreciate that leadership. For nearly 75 years,
the National Council on Aging has operated under the principle
that aging well in America should be a right, not a privilege
for the few.
We applaud the leadership of the Chairman for initiating an
effort to ensure the Older Americans Act can reach all
Americans with an appropriations letter, with 41 other Senators
supporting doubling the support for the program.
Thank you for that important leadership, because we know
from our work every day with partners from across the country
helping older adults secure jobs, enroll in programs that can
help with food and medicine, and learn how to better manage
their chronic conditions and prevent falls, there is more need
and demand than ever before, and this reauthorization is an
opportunity to strengthen and modernize the act to meet those
needs.
Before I get started on our recommendations, I would like
to share one story of millions that we have collected over the
years. Ms. West is a family caregiver in her 60's, and she
shared with our team, navigating all the challenges my mom has
faced these past few years has been difficult.
The death of my father, moving in with my husband and I,
cancer, and surgery, not to mention COVID. Yet after she had a
fall, the local senior center connected us to the capable team.
The capable team came into our home with fresh eyes and ears,
years of experience, and kind hearts.
They helped by offering home modification ideas we hadn't
thought of and resources we didn't even know existed. Our home
is now better equipped to keep my mom safe, and we have a plan
for the future as her needs increase. She has even gotten
involved in the senior center and made some new friends.
Ms. West shares, I wish every senior could have the peace
of mind all of this has offered us. Stories like this one and
so many more informed the recommendations I will share with you
today. We know more than 90 percent of older adults live in
communities, and the Older Americans Act plays a critical role
in providing non-medical professional services to ensure all
can age well at home.
Our priorities for this reauthorization begin with senior
centers, which are a time tested model to deliver on the
promise of the Act. A visitor to a senior center can come into
exercise, get screened for benefits, take an art class, get a
hot meal and socialize, learn a new language, or find purpose
through volunteering.
Despite all this important work, senior centers face
chronic budget shortfalls and are not generally funded by the
Older Americans Act. Through reauthorization, Congress has an
opportunity to ensure that a modern senior center is available
to every American.
We must address lessons learned from the pandemic,
reinstate a separate title for senior centers, strengthen the
authorization for modernizing them, and increase funding for
senior nutrition programs to allow for parity between home
delivered and congregate meal settings.
Our second priority is healthy aging. We know that chronic
conditions are the leading cause of frailty, disability, and
death in the U.S., but we also know there are evidence based
programs that make a difference. They save lives and they save
money.
For instance, participants in that capable program around
home modifications to prevent falls on average save $30,000 to
the health system. Participants in the chronic disease self-
management program are shown to save $700 per participant in
emergency room and hospital visits.
Given that 80 percent of older adults have two or more
chronic conditions, we believe that chronic disease self-
management program should be offered and available in every ZIP
code, which is not the case today.
Title 3(d) of the Act supports this work, but funding has
not kept pace with the growing needs and costs. To expand
reach, reauthorization should double the authorized funding
levels for Title 3(d) and expand the continuum of programs
funded to include those that are evidence formed as well as
evidence based.
Our third priority is direct care workforce and the desire
for home and community based services. Funded by ACL, NCOA
leads the Direct Care Workforce Strategy Center, which is
working to address the workforce shortage crisis with state
systems change.
We ask that reauthorization strengthen authorities for
sustained funding for this center to increase technical
assistance and training for states that are looking for
creative solutions to build that workforce given the increase
in demand.
Finally, the Act is critical to ensuring the economic
security of older adults, especially those that need and want
to continue to work. Since 1968, NCOA has served as a National
Administrator of the Senior Community Service Employment
Program, or SCSEP.
A Department of Labor program that is authorized and funded
under the Act, SCSEP is the only Federal job training program
focused exclusively on helping older Americans return to the
workforce.
The majority of participants are women and people of color,
and the job training provides more than a job. It is dignity,
its purpose, its security. We advocate for lowering the
eligibility for the program from 55 to age 50 and raising the
income eligibility from 125 percent of Federal poverty to 200
percent of the Federal poverty level.
Reaching people earlier, as well as those on the edge, will
enable more to benefit from this successful program, providing
them the income, the security, the purpose needed to age well,
and they will continue to be taxpayers. In conclusion, the
Older Americans Act provides a critical blueprint for ensuring
we have the infrastructure needed in our Country to support all
of us as we age.
Now is the time to modernize and strengthen the Act to meet
the needs of today and tomorrow so that every American,
including each of us here today, can age well. Thank you, and I
am happy to take any questions you may have.

prepared statement of ramsey alwin
Introduction
Chairman Sanders, Ranking Member Cassidy, and Members of the Senate
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today about
the vital need to reauthorize, modernize, and fund the Older Americans
Act OAA to support the needs of older adults.
I am Ramsey Alwin, President and CEO of the National Council on
Aging NCOA, the Nation's oldest organization focused on serving older
adults. For nearly 75 years, we have worked to improve the lives of
older Americans, especially vulnerable and underserved populations.
From advocating for passage of the original Older Americans Act,
Medicare, and Medicaid, to helping end mandatory retirement, NCOA has
operated under the principle that aging well in America should be a
right for all, not a privilege for a few.
NCOA's goal is to improve the health and economic security of 40
million older adults by 2030, especially women, people of color, LGBTQ,
low-income, and rural individuals. Working with thousands of national
and local partners, we provide resources, tools, best practices, and
advocacy to ensure every person can age with health and financial
security. Every day, our team works to help individuals secure job
training and placement, enroll in programs that help with the cost of
food and medicine, better manage their chronic conditions like diabetes
and hypertension, and prevent falls. All our insights from our direct
service delivery inform our reauthorization recommendations.
The OAA is integral to achieving NCOA's vision of a just and caring
society in which each of us, as we age, lives with dignity, purpose,
and security. First enacted in 1965, the OAA establishes priorities and
operations for key programs and services that help keep our Nation's
adults ages 60 and older healthy and independent.
The OAA is the designated vehicle to plan for and provide
professional assistance to older Americans and their families,
providing the many nonmedical care services that older adults often
need and complementing the support provided by Medicare, Medicaid, and
Social Security. The Act provides the blueprint that encompasses the
full range of services and supports that address vital social
determinants of health and allow all of us to age well in community and
at home as desired. Further, OAA-funded services and supports have been
shown to reduce health care costs and delay nursing home placement. \1\
Given that greater than 90 percent of older adults live in communities,
\2\ we must recognize the OAA's critical role in supporting family
caregivers who are the backbone of long-term care for older adults.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.liebertpub.com/doi/10.1089/pop.2017.0199.
\2\ https://aspe.hhs.gov/reports/understanding-characteristics-
older-adults-different-residential-settings-data-sources-trends-
0#exhibit2.
Reauthorization of the OAA provides a critical opportunity to
strengthen and revitalize its many important provisions. Previous
bipartisan reauthorization efforts have created innovative new programs
that have significantly improved the lives of older adults, their
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
caregivers, and the Aging Network. For example:
The Supporting Older Americans Act of 2020 created a
Research, Demonstration and Evaluation Center for the Aging
Network. The purpose of the Center is to coordinate research,
evaluation, and demonstration projects and increase the
repository of information on evidence-based programs and
interventions available to the Aging Network. \3\ This work
will help us understand how the Aging Network can improve the
lives of older adults and do its part in slowing the growth in
expenditures of programs like Medicare and Medicaid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://www.aginganddisabilitybusinessinstitute.org/wp-
content/uploads/2021/05/Policy-Spotlight-OAA-Research-FINAL-508.pdf.
The OAA Amendments Act of 2006 created the National
Center for Benefits Outreach and Enrollment. The Center
supports a network of community-based organizations that find
and enroll low-income beneiciaries--generally with annual
incomes below $22,000--in benefits programs they are eligible
for. Thanks to this work, from 2022-2023, 9.3 million low-
income older adults and individuals with disabilities were
connected to benefits \4\ that enable them to afford
prescription drugs and other needed health care, as well as
food and energy assistance.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ https://www.ncoa.org/article/helping-lower-income-adults-
afford-Medicare.
The 2000 OAA reauthorization created the National
Family Caregiver Support Program, which provides grants to
states and territories to fund a range of supports that assist
family and informal caregivers to care for their loved ones at
home for as long as possible. Grantees provide information to
caregivers about available services, individual counseling,
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
support groups, caregiver training, and respite care.
Today's realities demand that we examine the OAA with fresh eyes
and with innovation at the forefront. The OAA must be modernized to
better address the needs of the diverse and growing older adult
population, which includes not only the Silent Generation and Baby
Boomers, but also Generation X, whose members start to turn 60 in 2025.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, from 2010 to 2020, the 65-plus
population experienced its largest-ever percentage-point increase--from
13.0 percent to 16.8 percent of the total population. Before 2010, it
took 50 years--from 1960 to 2010--for the older population's share of
the total population to grow by the same number of percentage points.
\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ https://www.census.gov/library/stories/2023/05/2020-census-
united-states-older-population-grew.html.
The older population is also increasingly diverse. In 2020, 24
percent of individuals ages 65 and older were members of racial or
ethnic minority populations. Over the next two decades, the white non-
Hispanic older population is expected to grow by 26 percent, while
older racial and ethnic minority populations are expected to increase
by 105 percent, as the younger more racially and ethnically diverse
generation ages. \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ https://acl.gov/sites/default/files/Proile%20of%20OA/
2021%20Proile%20of%20OA/2021ProileOlderAmericans-508.pdf.
While demand for OAA services is growing and diversifying, OAA
funding is not keeping pace. This financial reality has made it
increasingly difficult for the Aging Network to maintain existing
services, let alone expand. The supplemental funding Congress provided
to the Aging Network during the COVID-19 pandemic was critical to
helping older adults most at-risk and in greatest need. But today, the
demand for these services continues, while the relief funds are running
out. The pandemic sharply underscored the value of and critical need
for additional investment in OAA programs.
NCOA Priorities
As the leading advocate on behalf of older adults and the Aging
Network, NCOA has several priorities that we believe should be included
in this year's OAA Reauthorization. Our priorities focus broadly on
senior centers, healthy aging, and economic security.
Senior Centers
For more than 80 years, senior centers have provided access to
support services and opportunities for healthy aging in a highly social
setting in towns and neighborhoods across the Nation. The OAA has
recognized their importance for 50 years--by including multi-purpose
senior centers in 1973 and by establishing the senior nutrition
program. In the establishment of the Aging Network, senior centers were
to be given special consideration as community focal points to deliver
OAA services on a local level. Today, an estimated 11,000 senior
centers operate locally, sometimes hyper locally, as gathering places
for generations of older adults to stay active, healthy, and connected.
Research shows that older adults who participate in senior center
programs experience better mental health across several measures
compared to non-participants, including perceived social and health
benefits, \7\ depression, \8\ friendship, \9\ and stress levels. \10\
Compared to their peers, senior center participants have higher levels
of health, social interaction, and life satisfaction.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Gitelson, R., McCabe, J., Fitzpatrick, T., & Case, A. 2005.
Factors that influence perceived social and health benefits of
attendance at senior centers. Activities, Adaptation & Aging, 30, 23-
45.
\8\ Choi, N., & McDougall, G. 2007. Comparison of depressive
symptoms between homebound older adults and ambulatory older adults.
Aging Mental Health, 11, 310-322.
\9\ Aday, R., Kehoe, G., & Farney, L. 2006. The impact of senior
center friendships on aging women who live alone. Journal of Women &
Aging, 18, 57-73.
\10\ Farone, D., Fitzpatrick, T., & Tran, T. 2005. Use of senior
centers as a moderator of stress-related distress among Latino elders.
Journal of Gerontological Social Work, 46, 65-83.
Senior centers are a time-tested model to deliver on the promise of
the Older Americans Act. They provide for the ``maximum co-location of
services,'' which differentiates them from other community-based
organizations. A visitor to a senior center can come to exercise and
also get screened for benefits, take an art class and get a hot meal,
or learn a new language and find purpose through volunteering. At their
core, senior centers are places that foster social connection and
belonging, addressing the epidemic of loneliness \11\ identified by the
U.S. Surgeon General.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ https://www.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/surgeon-general-
social-connection-advisory.pdf.
Senior centers also serve as critical lifelines for many older
adults in the community. This was never more evident as during the
pandemic that brought a disproportionately harsh impact on older
adults. Senior centers across the country sprang into action, ensuring
that older adults, especially the most vulnerable, had credible
information; access to nutrition through meal delivery, grab-and-go
meals, and grocery shopping services; and social engagement through
online programs, parking lot parties, drive-through programs, and
thousands upon thousands of phone calls. With deep knowledge of their
communities, senior centers creatively pivoted to meet ever-changing
needs. Many moved programs from in-person to virtual. Today, their in-
person participation is rebounding, and those with capacity continue to
offer virtual options for older adults who cannot attend the center due
to transportation or health issues. When vaccines became available,
senior centers stepped in to facilitate appointments, provide
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
transportation, and host clinics.
Senior centers are also an integral part of the OAA senior
nutrition program. The OAA created two delivery systems for nutrition--
congregate meals Title III-C1 and, for those unable to access a
congregate meal, home-delivered meals Title III-C2. The pandemic
demonstrated the importance of elevating both home-delivered meals and
congregate meals as equally important vehicles for fighting senior
hunger and addressing social isolation. These proven and effective
community-based programs have more than 50 years of experience,
expertise, and trust to serve those in greatest need. However, with
rising costs and increasing demand, merely maintaining current funding
levels is not enough. We need to increase the authorization level and
provide greater parity to support both approaches at scale.
Senior centers are the most common site for congregate meals.
During the pandemic, we saw innovation in meal delivery such as grab-
and-go meals and virtual options for dining with friends. The
flexibility to implement innovative solutions should be maintained and
encouraged, as should local flexibility, with limits, to shift funds to
the most-needed services. However, the OAA should continue to recognize
and prioritize them as distinct programs and fund them equally and
adequately. Sharing a meal is one of the most treasured traditions of
social connection. We must support the modernization of the congregate
meal, in conjunction with senior centers, to ensure current and future
generations of older adults have this opportunity.
While they provide these critical services, senior centers, in
general, are chronically underfunded. They rely on municipal dollars,
philanthropy, and fundraising. While some are operated by Area Agencies
on Aging AAAs, especially when the AAA is part of county government,
most are not. They are part of municipal government or nonprofit
community-based organizations. In 1978's Older Americans Act
Reauthorization, senior centers were placed in the consolidated Title
III-B, Support Services and Senior Centers. In the allocation of scarce
resources and without a requirement that any percentage of the
appropriation for III-B be directed to senior centers, senior centers
generally are not funded by the OAA. They might get funding on a
service unit reimbursement rate (e.g., for meal delivery) but not for
general programs, operations, or facility needs.
Senior centers that received investments from the American Rescue
Plan (ARPA) saw innovations that were not possible before. ARPA was an
infusion of funding that supported innovations like grab-and-go meals,
allowed communities to make renovations or purchase equipment (for
exercise, technology, kitchens, etc.), and shored up the senior
nutrition program. ARPA showed us what was possible with better
support. However, once ARPA funds are expended, those innovations will
not likely be funded, and the programs that were supported will, again,
face budget shortfalls.
NCOA has been the national voice for senior centers for more than
50 years. We have over 2,300 senior centers in our affiliate network
and, through a 3-year cooperative agreement with the U.S.
Administration for Community Living (ACL), we have established a
Resource Center for the modernization of senior centers. Through this
work, we see some senior centers that are modernizing and thriving with
new or renovated facilities that support today's technological needs,
fitness programs, evidence-based programs, meal options, and services
to address complex issues like homelessness and behavioral health.
These centers also provide support for economic security through
information and referral and benefits enrollment. They have
collaborative partnerships with organizations and businesses in their
communities, with aging network partners like AAAs, and with community
partners like libraries, parks and recreation, and public health. New
models of senior centers, including public/private partnerships,
wellness centers, and intergenerational centers have been developed.
But not all senior centers are thriving. NCOA conducted an
environmental scan, which identified the successes and challenges of
senior centers today. Inadequate support, both in recognition of their
value and in the allocation of resources, is at the top of the list of
challenges. \12\ Centers do not have the funding and direction needed
to upgrade their facilities, to access technology, and to ensure a
skilled workforce. The centers that struggle the most are those in
areas of greatest need.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ https://www.ncoa.org/article/the-state-of-todays-senior-
centers-successes-challenges-and-opportunities.
Through OAA Reauthorization, Congress has an opportunity and
obligation to provide the focus and funding that will ensure that a
modern senior center--one that addresses the needs of current and
future generations of older adults in a way that is culturally
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
meaningful--is available in every ZIP code.
OAA Reauthorization should:
Address lessons learned from the pandemic related to
promoting equitable access to senior center services,
addressing diverse needs, and pursuing innovation in nutrition
programs.
Ensure strong congregate settings in the community by
reinstating a separate title for senior centers and updated
language that retains the ``special consideration'' of senior
centers as designated focal points and by strengthening support
for multipurpose senior center infrastructure and services,
while allowing for the flexibility capacity for virtual
connections.
Strengthen the authorization for modernizing senior
centers.
Increase the authorization level of senior nutrition
programs to allow for greater parity for both home-delivered
meals and congregate meals approaches to be equally funded at
scale.
Healthy Aging
Title III-D Health Promotion
Chronic conditions are the leading cause of frailty, disability,
and death in the United States. They lead to declining activities of
daily living ADLs, causing affected individuals to lose their
independence, require help from family and/or paid caregivers, and need
long-term services and supports. Yet, there are evidence-based health
promotion and disease prevention programs that we know can help and
work.
NCOA has been a leader in expanding access to health promotion and
disease prevention programs, many of which have been shown through
research to reduce or delay expensive hospital or nursing home
admissions. Through education, outreach, and community programs, NCOA
provides older Americans with the tools and resources they need to age
well--physically, cognitively, and mentally. Through our ACL-funded
National Chronic Disease Self-Management Education and Falls Prevention
Resource Centers, NCOA provides broad support and technical assistance
to state agencies and community-based organizations delivering these
programs.
These health promotion and disease prevention programs result in
positive health outcomes related to managing chronic disease,
preventing falls, increasing physical activity, and reducing symptoms
of depression and social isolation. These well-researched programs have
resulted in health care cost savings for participants: \13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ https://www.ncoa.org/article/falls-prevention-programs-
saving-lives-saving-money-infographic.
A Matter of Balance, a falls prevention program,
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
reduces total annual medical costs by $938 per participant.
The Otago Exercise Program reduces falls by 35
percent, resulting in net savings of $429 per participant.
The Community Aging in Place Advancing Better Living
for Elders Program (CAPABLE) provides home modifications to
reduce falls risks resulting in more than $30,000 in medical
costs savings.
The Chronic Disease Self-Management Program (CDSMP)
shows participants saved $714 in emergency department visits
and hospital utilization. If 10 percent of Americans with one
or more chronic conditions were reached by CDSMP, there's
potential for $6.6 billion in savings. \14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Lorig K, Ritter P, Stewart AL, et al. Chronic Disease Self-
Management Program: 2-Year Health Status and Health Care Utilization
Outcomes. Medical Care. 2001;39:1217-1223.
Given that 80 percent of older adults experience two or more
chronic conditions, NCOA believes CDSMP should be offered in every ZIP
code across the U.S. in an effort to save lives and decrease health
care costs. CDSMP is a workshop for adults with at least one chronic
health condition, which may include diabetes, heart disease, or
arthritis. Given that chronic conditions are the primary drivers of
health care costs and disability, as well as declines in quality of
life, we must ensure that anyone with a chronic illness has access to
this program. CDSMP focuses on critical disease management skills,
including decision-making, problem-solving, and action planning. The
program increases confidence, physical and psychological well-being,
knowledge of ways to manage chronic conditions, and motivation to
manage challenges associated with chronic diseases. Interactive
educational activities include peer discussions, brainstorming, action-
planning and feedback, behavior modeling, problem-solving techniques,
and decision-making. The program also results in behavior change, such
as more exercise and relaxation, better communication with health care
providers, healthy eating, medication management, and better management
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
of fatigue.
The delivery of these programs to older adults is funded by OAA
Title III-D. Funding amounted to $26.3 million in the fiscal year 2023
Federal budget; this funding is shared across all states, territories,
and the District of Columbia. Beginning in 2012, ACL required that
programs funded by Title III-D meet strict evidence-based criteria
defined as proven effective for improving the health and well-being or
reducing disease, disability, and/or injury among older adults; and
proven effective with older adult population, using experimental or
quasi-experimental design; and results published in a peer-review
journal; and fully translated in one or more community site(s); and
includes developed dissemination products that are available to the
public.
However, not all these programs are reaching older adults in need,
especially in rural and diverse communities. This lack of access is due
in part to inadequate funding under OAA Title III-D, which has not kept
pace with growing needs and costs to deliver evidence-based programs.
Congress and the Administration must address lessons learned from the
pandemic related to promoting equitable access to services, addressing
diverse needs, and expanding healthy aging programs that are offered
both in-person and virtually. For example, the costs associated with
delivery of virtual programs are significantly higher in most cases
than in-person programs due to greater technology and staffing needs.
NCOA recognizes that evidence-based programs have some
implementation challenges and inequities. Most have not been tested
with a full diversity of populations, communities, or contexts. Some
communities struggle to implement them as designed. Therefore, we
advocate for expanding the continuum of programs funded under the OAA
to include those that are ``evidence-informed,'' defined as an approach
in which ``practitioners are encouraged to be knowledgeable about
findings coming from all types of studies and to use them in an
integrative manner, taking into consideration experience with a program
or intervention and judgment, clients' preferences and values, and
context of the interventions.'' \15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Adapted from: Nevo, I., & Slonim-Nevo, V. 2011. The myth of
evidence-based practice: toward evidence-informed practice. British
Journal of Social Work, 411, 1-22.
NCOA is proud to be leading the Innovation Lab through funding from
ACL's Center for Performance and Evaluation. We are partnering with
researchers to take a ``core-components'' approach to identify what is
truly necessary to achieve the ultimate goal--better outcomes for
people and communities. This broader approach gives communities the
flexibility to deliver programs that match their capacity and meet the
needs of their culturally diverse populations. This core components
methodology is being applied to falls prevention interventions, and we
believe it has significant potential across other areas of aging
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
services such as nutrition and chronic disease management.
OAA Reauthorization should:
Double authorized funding levels for OAA Title III-D
to support the licensing, training, technology, and other costs
required for implementation of evidence-based programs.
Expand the continuum of programs funded under the OAA
to include those that are ``evidence-informed.''
Jane's Story
One of our participants, a 76-year-old woman, initially relied on a
walker for mobility. However, as she diligently engaged in the
exercises taught in our sessions, her progress was remarkable. By the
third session, she entered class confidently using only her cane,
brimming with pride at her newfound ability. Her excitement was
palpable as she shared how these exercises had significantly improved
her mobility and daily activities. Her husband, who accompanied her to
class, echoed her joy, thrilled to engage in activities together that
had been out of reach for a while.
Home Safety and Home Modifications
NCOA also advocates for using OAA reauthorization to enhance
resources for home modification screenings and implementation. Older
adults are living longer in the community, many with chronic conditions
and disabilities that impact their daily function and risk for falls.
Across older households, 28 percent have at least one person who has
difficulty using some element of the home, such as climbing stairs or
bathing. \16\ The home's condition affects a person's ability to care
for themselves and caregivers' ability to provide care. Home
modifications that increase safety and support daily activities play a
key role in helping people stay in their homes and communities as they
age. Yet, fewer than 4 percent \17\ of U.S. homes are suitable for
people with moderate mobility disabilities, and only about 1 percent
are wheelchair accessible. OAA Title III-B funding can be used to fund
home modifications, but it is capped at $150 per person based on a 1988
Federal regulation. In many states, this would not cover the cost to
install a grab bar. States can request Federal permission to waive that
cap, but this can be time-consuming, and many are not aware of this
option or how to go about it.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ https://www.census.gov/library/publications/2013/demo/h150-
11.html..
\17\ https://www.jchs.harvard.edu/research-areas/working-papers/
how-well-does-housing-stock-meet-accessibility-needs-analysis-2019.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
OAA Reauthorization should:
Remove the outdated $150 per person home modification
cap and give states more flexibility and control to support
their older population's ability to age in place.
Direct Care Workforce
Between 2021 and 2031, the direct care workforce is projected to
add more than 1 million new jobs, resulting in a total of 9.3 million
direct care jobs need to be filled, \18\ according to PHI. Low wages,
lack of full-time employment, and the pandemic have caused fewer
workers to enter direct care at the exact time the need for their
services is growing.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ https://www.phinational.org/resource/direct-care-workers-in-
the-united-states-key-facts-2023/.
Funded by ACL, the Direct Care Workforce Strategies Center, housed
at NCOA, is addressing this challenge by supporting state systems
change through the provision of resources, technical assistance, and
training to state systems, providers, and stakeholders to improve
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
direct care workforce recruitment, training, and retention.
This Center addresses the charge of OAA and its National Family
Caregiver Support Program enacted as part of the 2000 OAA
reauthorization to build and strengthen the care infrastructure needed
to address the pressing challenges that threaten the independence,
health, and economic security of older adults who rely on the support
of family caregivers.
OAA Reauthorization should:
Strengthen authorities for sustained funding for the
Direct Care Workforce Strategies Center beyond five years to
increase dissemination of state technical assistance and
training opportunities to ensure an adequate and well-trained
direct care workforce.
Economic Security
Older adults are more likely to face economic insecurity as they
age. In 2023, poverty among older adults rose for the third consecutive
year to 14 percent. \19\ An analysis conducted by NCOA and the
LeadingAge LTSS Center at the University of Massachusetts, Boston found
that of people age 60 and older, 80 percent 47 million do not have the
financial resources to cover long-term care services or another
financial shock, nearly 20 percent of older households have no assets
to draw upon to withstand a financial shock, and 21-80 percent of older
adults have modest assets but would still be unable to afford more than
2 years of nursing home care or 4 years in an assisted living
community. \20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ https://www.ncoa.org/article/older-adult-poverty-continues-
upward-trend-reaching-an-unacceptable-14-percent.
\20\ https://www.ncoa.org/article/80-percent-of-older-americans-
cannot-pay-for-long-term-care-or-withstand-a-inancial-shock-new-study-
shows.
An important factor in determining older adults' economic security
is the geographic location of their primary residence. Regions such as
the Northeast and the West Coast have a higher cost of living compared
to states in the Sunbelt region. NCOA urges Congress and the
Administration to modernize and increase flexibility in the
determination of economic need with proven tools such as the Elder
Index, \21\ which is a more accurate measure of the income older adults
need to meet their basic needs and age in place with dignity. It
includes household size, geographic location, housing, and health
status in determining costs of living. The Elder Index is updated
annually to include the latest Consumer Price Index data to account for
inflation costs. Elder Index data show that nearly half of older adults
live alone, and one in five older couples are economically insecure and
cannot pay for necessities. \22\ The costs of necessities in every
state exceeds the Federal poverty thresholds used in eligibility
requirements for benefits programs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ https://elderindex.org/.
\22\ Mutchler, Jan; Su, Yan-Jhu; and Velasco Roldan, Nidya,
``Living Below the Line: Economic Insecurity and Older Americans,
Insecurity in the States, 2022'' 2023. Center for Social and
Demographic Research on Aging Publications. 66.
The Elder Index also shows that the average Social Security benefit
does not cover the cost of basic expenses. Researchers from the
University of Massachusetts, Boston reported that the average Social
Security benefit only covers 68 percent of the costs for basic
necessities for a single person living alone and 81 percent for couples
living together. \23\ This gap identifies the reality that many older
adults must use other means to cover their basic costs either by
working, withdrawing from savings and other retirement accounts, or
relying on social safety net programs such as the Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program SNAP or Medicare Savings Programs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ https://kfhealthnews.org/news/article/elder-index-aging-
costs-seniors-basic-necessities/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
OAA Reauthorization should:
Modernize and increase flexibility in the
determination of economic need with proven tools such as the
Elder Index to ensure the local cost of living are addressed as
future generations are expected to age with limited financial
resources.
Christian's Story
Christian, 61, lives with disabilities and relies on a fixed income
of $1,156 monthly. He relocated to Windsor, VT, to assist his 93-year-
old father with his care. Christian previously paid $148.50 for
Medicare, along with co-pays for medications, without receiving
assistance for food, fuel, or prescriptions. Unfamiliar with available
resources in Vermont due to being a non-native, Christian faced
financial strain when prescribed a new medication with a $500 co-pay.
With the help of a local benefits enrollment center, Senior Solutions,
Christian received a tablet for telehealth, facilitating his connection
with family in New York and easing access to medical services.
Additionally, Christian applied for food benefits, fuel assistance, and
pharmacy aid programs, promptly receiving a tablet for telehealth, a
SNAP card with $202 for food, $56 for fuel assistance, and relief from
his Medicare Part B premium, qualifying him for Medicaid after a $60
spend down. Thrilled by these benefits, Christian anticipates saving
for a car, resulting in monthly savings exceeding $500. These supports
allow Christian to continue to care for his father and himself, both
remaining independent.
Older Workers
For millions of Americans, aging well means having the opportunity
to work in the years leading up to and beyond the traditional
retirement age. The reasons older adults want or need to work are the
same as at any age. Work provides meaning, social connections, and
much-needed income to pay for daily needs. As longevity continues to
climb and many Americans struggle to save enough for retirement, work
is also essential to affording a longer life. This is especially true
for older adults of color, who experience higher rates of poverty than
white older adults, and among rural and LGBTQ+ older adults who face
access barriers and discrimination in employment.
Since 1968, NCOA has served as one of several national
administrators for the Senior Community Services Employment Program
SCSEP. Today, we provide SCSEP services in 11 states and Puerto Rico,
including Georgia, New York, North Carolina, and Pennsylvania. This
work has given us clear insight into the value older workers contribute
to our economy.
A Department of Labor program that is authorized and funded under
OAA, SCSEP is the only Federal job training program focused exclusively
on helping older Americans return to the workforce. It prioritizes
services to veterans, individuals with disabilities, those living in
rural communities, and other most-in-need older adults who have low job
prospects and significant barriers to employment. Significant
majorities of participants have incomes below the 125 percent Federal
poverty line, are women, and are people of color. The program enables
them to develop new skills and add work experience through subsidized
community training assignments with local nonprofit organizations.
SCSEP incorporates benefits coordination and access to wraparound
services. Older workers--particularly low-income individuals with
significant barriers to employment--have traditionally been left behind
by public workforce systems and strategies. Many have been out of the
workforce due to caregiving responsibilities, health and disability
challenges, and age discrimination. For many, the traditional 40-hour
week and year-round employment placement envisioned in Workforce
Innovation and Opportunity Act WIOA and other public workforce programs
are not appropriate. These systems lack the targeted, one-on-one
counseling and assistance many older workers require for successful
training and re-employment.
However, the impact on ageism starts much before age 55. We
advocate for lowering SCSEP eligibility to 50, so we can broaden the
impact of the program by helping people retool their skill set earlier
in life. Similarly, we recommend broadening the income eligibility to
at or below 200 percent of the Federal poverty level to recognize that
those who are slightly over the current cap still need the help of a
program like this. If we focus on younger individuals with slightly
more income initially, we will be able to further decrease the curve of
individuals falling into a position that requires Federal benefits and
Medicaid.
OAA Reauthorization should:
Update SCSEP eligibility to make it available to
adults 50 years and older.
Adjust income eligibly guidelines to allow for
individuals with incomes at or below 200 percent of the Federal
poverty level to improve access for older workers struggling
with financial security and employment.
Susan's Story
At age 75, Susan learned of the NCOA SCSEP program while waiting at
her doctor's office. Unsure of what to expect, but in dire need of
work, she took a chance and dialed the number listed on the flyer,
hoping for assistance. At the Crawford County Read Program, Susan found
fulfillment in helping people of all ages improve their literacy and
basic math skills. However, when the program faced closure due to
funding issues, Susan feared returning to financial uncertainty.
Thankfully, another opportunity arose swiftly, and Susan embarked
on training as a receptionist at an organization dedicated to mental
health awareness. As Susan's tenure in the program approached its
conclusion, her colleagues recognized her value and advocated for her
to join the team permanently. In a remarkable show of support, Susan's
coworkers collectively urged management to hire her full-time.
Now secure in her job and an active taxpayer, Susan expresses a
newfound sense of relief, stating that she can finally relax knowing
she has stable employment. She passionately shares her experience with
others, emphasizing the vital role of SCSEP in assisting older adults
facing employment obstacles, noting that the program can be a lifeline
for many.
Conclusion
The OAA provides our Nation with a blueprint for ensuring we have
the infrastructure in place to support individuals across the full
spectrum of domains related to aging in community and at home as we all
desire. The various titles of the Act intentionally and thoughtfully
support an ecosystem for deploying services and supports that reflect
the needs of states and communities, prioritizing the most vulnerable.
With nearly 12,000 people turning 65 each day this year and for the
next several years, we applaud ACL's leadership in updating the Act
with the recently released OAA regulations, largely building upon
lessons of the pandemic, and we also recognize that demographic trends
require us to further align Federal, state, and local programs with the
needs of today and tomorrow. We appreciate this opportunity to offer
our priorities to reauthorize, modernize, and fund the Older Americans
Act to ensure every American can age well.
______

NCOA appreciates the opportunity to discuss the vital need to
reauthorize, modernize, and fund the Older Americans Act (OAA) to
support the needs of older adults. From advocating for passage of the
original OAA to helping end mandatory retirement, NCOA has operated
under the principle that aging well in America should be a right for
all, not a privilege for a few.
Today's realities demand that we examine the OAA with fresh eyes
and with innovation at the forefront. The OAA must be modernized to
better address the needs of the diverse and growing older adult
population, which includes not only the Silent Generation and Baby
Boomers, but also Generation X, whose members start to turn 60 in 2025.
While demand for OAA services is growing and diversifying, funding
is not keeping pace. This financial reality has made it increasingly
difficult for the Aging Network to maintain existing services, let
alone expand. The supplemental funding Congress provided during the
COVID-19 pandemic was critical to helping older adults most at-risk and
in greatest need. But today, the demand for these services continues,
while the relief funds are running out.
NCOA has several priorities that we believe should be included in
OAA Reauthorization:
Senior Centers: (1) Address lessons learned from the
pandemic related to promoting equitable access to senior center
services, addressing diverse needs, and pursuing innovation in
nutrition programs; (2) Ensure strong congregate settings in
the community by reinstating a separate title for senior
centers and updated language that retains the ``special
consideration'' of senior centers as designated focal points
and by strengthening support for multipurpose senior center
infrastructure and services, while allowing for the flexibility
capacity for virtual connections; (3) Strengthen the
authorization for modernizing senior centers; (4) Increase the
authorization level of senior nutrition programs to allow for
greater parity for both home-delivered meals and congregate
meals approaches to be equally funded at scale.
Title III-D Health Promotion: (1) Double authorized
funding levels for OAA Title III-D to support the licensing,
training, technology, and other costs required for
implementation of evidence-based programs and (2) Expand the
continuum of programs funded under the OAA to include those
that are ``evidence-informed.''
Home Safety and Home Modifications: Remove the
outdated $150 per person home modification cap and give states
more flexibility and control to support their older
population's ability to age in place.
Direct Care Workforce: Strengthen authorities for
sustained funding for the Direct Care Workforce Strategies
Center beyond five years to increase dissemination of state
technical assistance and training opportunities to ensure an
adequate and well-trained direct care workforce.
Economic Security: Modernize and increase flexibility
in the determination of economic need with proven tools such as
the Elder Index to ensure the local cost of living are
addressed as future generations are expected to age with
limited financial resources.
Older Workers: (1) Update SCSEP eligibility to make
it available to adults 50 years and older and (2) Adjust income
eligibly guidelines to allow for individuals with incomes at or
below 200 percent of the Federal poverty level to improve
access for older workers struggling with financial security and
employment.
______
The Chair. Well, thank you very much. Our next witness is
Ms. Ellie Hollander, the President and CEO of Meals on Wheels
America, which is a national membership organization that
represents 5,000 local community based programs across the
country dedicated to improving the nutrition and lives of
seniors. Ms. Hollander, thanks so much for being with us.
STATEMENT OF ELLIE HOLLANDER, PRESIDENT AND CEO,
MEALS ON WHEELS AMERICA, ARLINGTON, VA
Ms. Hollander. Good morning, Chairman Sanders, Ranking
Member Cassidy, and esteemed Members of the Committee. It is an
honor to testify before you on such an important topic, and
especially during March, the month in 1972 in which the
nutrition program was added to the Older Americans Act.
Obviously, I am Ellie Hollander, and I am President and CEO
of Meals on Wheels America, and I am so proud to present--to
represent an incredibly dedicated and effective nationwide
network of senior nutrition programs, an army of committed
staff and volunteers, and the millions of older adults who rely
on them as a lifeline.
Particularly relevant to the hearing today, I am driven to
amplify the voices of the millions more who would benefit if
only we had the resources to reach them, whether in their
homes, in senior centers, or in other community settings.
There are a few Federal programs which exemplify a
successful public, private partnership, much less set the gold
standard. Congress should take a bow on this one, because the
Older Americans Act is just that.
It has withstood the test of time, and it continues to
deliver on its original purpose and intent, improving and even
saving lives, and all while reducing taxpayer dollars. The
program is appropriately focused on those in the greatest
social and economic need, and in return delivers both a social
and an economic benefit.
Not many programs can claim that. With that said, we are at
a precipice that warrants action and there is no time to waste.
Senior lives hang in the balance. That is because the gap
between increasing need and our ability to provide resources
continues to widen at an unprecedented rate.
Despite critical investments made during the pandemic, we
cannot keep up with the demand at current funding levels.
Underscoring that point, 12 million seniors struggle with
hunger, which is greater than the populations of 44 states and
the District of Columbia. 2.5 million low income, food insecure
seniors are not receiving the meals for which they are eligible
and likely need.
7 out of 10 Meals on Wheels programs report higher demand
now than before the pandemic, and 1 in 3 has a waitlist with an
average waiting time of 3 months for vital meals.
The good news is that thanks to the foresight of President
Johnson for enacting the Older Americans Act, President Nixon
for expanding upon it, and Congress for continuing to invest in
it, the infrastructure already exists to solve for this growing
gap.
That is because local programs have built incredible trust
within their communities and developed immense expertise and
resilience through nearly six decades of service, including
operating through a pandemic. What these programs do on a daily
basis is truly remarkable and irreplaceable.
There is more good news, these services offer a significant
return on that investment. A recent report, The Case for Meals
on Wheels, showed consistent findings from 38 studies that
seniors receiving nutritious meals, companionship, and safety
and wellness checks, the typical Meals on Wheels service model,
experienced reductions in hospital visits and stays, health
care services and costs, nursing home usage, loneliness and
social isolation, falls, food insecurity, and nutritional risk.
For perspective, the annual cost of senior falls,
malnutrition, and social isolation exceed $107 billion
combined. And last, we can provide a senior, as Senator Sanders
likes to say, Meals on Wheels for an entire year for the
equivalent of roughly 1 day in the hospital or 10 days in a
nursing home.
But the best news of all is that Congress has the power to
propel a program that has received bipartisan and bicameral
support throughout the years because, quite frankly, it works.
Congressional support through this reauthorization is an
investment in the seniors of today that will improve health,
save lives, and reduce costs in the future.
To that end, here are three recommendations for your
consideration. The first is to increase the authorization
funding levels for all older Americans support programs to the
maximum amount possible.
We estimate that a $774 million increase is needed for the
nutrition program alone, just to close the current services
gap. The second is to create a single Title 3 nutrition
program, unifying the congregate, home delivered, and nutrition
services incentive programs into one program and funding
stream.
Local providers have told us repeatedly that this
adjustment would improve efficiency and enable them to far more
easily tailor services to their seniors. And the third is to
prioritize community based programs in Older Americans Act
contracts and grant awards.
Our programs provide a holistic service that starts with
the meal but opens the door to so much more, leading to better
health outcomes. Last, as you dig into the reauthorization
process, as Senator Sanders did, I would like to urge you to
visit a Meals on Wheels program in your state, if you haven't
recently, to go on a meal delivery, and to stop by a senior
center because seeing is believing.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your leadership on this
important issue and for the letter that you and 41 other
Senators sent--signed urging for a doubling of funding for
programs authorized under the Older Americans Act.
We all share that belief that no seniors should be left
hungry or isolated, and I stand ready to help in any way I can.

prepared statement of ellie hollander
Good morning, Chairman Sanders, Ranking Member Cassidy, and
esteemed Members of the Committee. Thank you for the opportunity to
testify before you at this critical hearing. I'm Ellie Hollander and am
proud to present before you as the President and CEO of Meals on Wheels
America. Meals on Wheels America is the national leadership
organization representing over 5,000 local nutrition programs committed
to addressing senior hunger and isolation in virtually every community
across the country and working toward a vision in which all seniors
live nourished lives with independence and dignity.
With the support of hundreds of thousands of committed volunteers
and staff members, local community programs deliver nutritious meals in
a variety of ways, including in group and/or grab-and-go settings, as
well as to individual homes, where they also provide friendly visits
and social interaction, safety checks, and connections to other health
and wellness services to support older Americans in greatest need. And
the underpinning of all this work and impact is a direct result of the
support, policies and funding provided through the Older Americans Act
(OAA).
For more than 50 years, the OAA has supported millions of our
Nation's seniors and caregivers through a network of state, regional
and local community-based programs. The local providers that we
represent at Meals on Wheels America serve as a direct lifeline to
those struggling with food insecurity, malnutrition, mobility,
loneliness, and countless other difficulties of aging. We frequently
say the service starts with the meal and opens the door to so much
more. It's the purposeful and unique combination of nutritious meals
and social connection that fosters a relationship with the individual
senior, enabling Meals on Wheels providers to identify and deliver
valuable services that promote independence and well-being. The impact
not only saves lives but also saves taxpayer dollars by ensuring that
our Nation's seniors live safer, longer and more nourished in their own
homes and out of other more costly healthcare settings. In fact, we can
serve a senior Meals on Wheels for an entire year for roughly the same
cost as 1 day in the hospital or 2 weeks in a nursing home. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Meals on Wheels America (2024), special analysis of ACL and
Mathematica's estimated meal cost (OAA Nutrition Programs Evaluation:
Meal Cost Analysis), Kaiser Family Foundation's daily hospital expense
data (State Health Facts: Hospital Adjusted Expenses per Inpatient
Day), and Genworth's cost of semi-private nursing home room (2021 Cost
of Care Survey) adjusted for inflation. Sources and methods available
at: https://www.mealsonwheelsamerica.org/docs/default-source/fact-
sheets/2023/what-we-deliver-2023-national-snapshot-sources-methods.pdf.
The OAA is considered the gold standard of a successful public-
private partnership, having delivered on its original intent and shown
great resiliency and adaptability through challenging times, including
a global pandemic. As its reauthorization approaches, Meals on Wheels
America is focusing on several key legislative recommendations that
further enhance the support and services provided to older adults.
Given the significant need, changing demographics, and inflationary
pressures, we are pushing for increased authorized funding levels
across all OAA programs, with an emphasis on closing the existing needs
gap for nutrition services and establishing incentives and funding for
medically tailored and culturally appropriate meals. An important
strategic proposal we are recommending involves unifying the Congregate
and Home-Delivered Nutrition Services with the Nutrition Services
Incentive Program (NSIP) under a single Title III-C Nutrition Program
and funding stream. This shift would improve efficiency at all levels
of the aging network and enable local service providers to tailor their
offerings to meet the diverse needs of seniors in their community far
more easily. Additionally, we believe there should be a concerted
effort to prioritize community-based organizations for nutrition
services contracts, as local providers are delivering a holistic
service and not just a meal. Finally, this reauthorization is also an
opportunity to continue to modernize the OAA to incorporate
innovations, flexibility, and successful practices that were leveraged
during the pandemic, ensuring that the Act is adaptable and responsive
to the evolving needs of America's older population.
The Foundation of the Older Americans Act
As we look toward this year's reauthorization of the OAA, we first
and foremost want to protect the core purposes of the Act and
underscore the significance of it as a solution to ending senior hunger
and social isolation in our Country and why it must be sufficiently
resourced.
The Older Americans Act of 1965 (OAA) was signed into law on July
14, 1965, as an answer to improving access to social services and
supports for older adults living in the community. Since then, the Act
has served as the primary Federal legislation supporting community-
based social services for adults 60 and older and the bedrock of
Federal support to the nationwide network of senior nutrition programs
that rely on Federal funding.
The OAA has evolved and grown over time through prior
reauthorizations and consists of seven titles today. Of the seven
titles, all but one is administered by the Administration on Aging
(AoA), a Federal sub-agency established by the OAA within the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Administration for
Community Living (ACL). At the state and local levels, OAA activities
are carried out by 56 State Units on Aging (SUA), over 600 Area
Agencies on Aging (AAA), and thousands of community-based
organizations. AoA, housed within ACL, is tasked with advocating for
older adults and persons with disabilities and supporting them in
securing and maintaining their health, well-being, and independence in
the community.
The largest title of the Act, accounting for 72 percent of the
OAA's total funding in fiscal year 2023, is Title III Grants for State
and Community Programs, which provides grants to states to help carry
out a variety of supportive service and health promotion programs for
older adults and their caregivers. \2\ The Title III Nutrition Program,
which includes congregate (Title III-C1) and home-delivered (Title III-
C2) nutrition services, and the Nutrition Services Incentives Program
(Title III-C), is a Federal program that supports the health and well-
being of older adults through nutrition services. We are proud and
thankful and want to underscore the significance of the OAA Nutrition
Program, which is the only Federal program designed specifically to
meet older adults' nutritional and social needs. The OAA Nutrition
Program is a successful public-private partnership, with the critical
Federal dollars provided leveraging an impressive funding match of
approximately 3 to 1, from additional state, local, and private
sources. \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Congressional Research Service (2023), Older Americans Act:
Overview and Funding. https://crsreports.Congress.gov/product/pdf/R/
R43414.
\3\ ACL (2019), Written Statement by Administrator and Assistance
Secretary for Aging Lance Robertson for the Senate Special Committee on
Aging. https://acl.gov/news-and-events/announcements/asa-robertson-
testified-senate-hearing-oaa-today.
Again, we believe that the Act successfully fulfills its purpose,
and that reauthorization efforts and modifications should be primarily
focused on improving the ability to reach more seniors.
The Pervasive Problem of Senior Hunger
Since its inception, the OAA Nutrition Program has provided
billions of meals to seniors in need, improved countless lives, and
saved considerable taxpayer dollars through well-established trust
built at both the community and national levels. While this program has
worked as it was designed for decades, it is not reaching all those in
need. Eight out of ten (80.3 percent) low-income, food insecure older
adults are not receiving the congregate or home-delivered meals that
they are eligible for and likely need. \4\ From a national survey, we
found that one in three local Meals on Wheels programs maintain waiting
lists, with seniors waiting on average 3 months for vital meals--an
increase of 10 percent for program waitlists from 2021. \5\ The same
survey found an overwhelming majority of programs, 78 percent, have
already or would need to add seniors to waitlists due to funding cuts.
These are only the individuals we are aware of and know that it is an
underrepresentation of the true need across the country. In fact, 97
percent in our survey indicated they believe that there is unmet need
in their communities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ U.S. Census Bureau (2022), Current Population Survey (CPS)
Food Security Supplement, Meals on Wheels America calculation of
dataset available at: https://www.census.gov/data/datasets/time-series/
demo/cps/cps-supp--cps-repwgt/cps-food-security.html.
\5\ Meals on Wheels America (November 2023), #SaveLunch Member
Pulse Survey. Internal report.
Additional research has found that older adults who seek Meals on
Wheels services are already more vulnerable than the average American
seniors, with poorer self-reported health, higher levels of depression
and anxiety, greater fears of falling and more. \6\ Simply put, while
older adults are on waiting lists and struggling to have their
nutritional and social needs met, their health is continuing to decline
and are more likely to end up in a hospital or nursing home prematurely
and at significantly higher cost to the individual and taxpayers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Meals on Wheels America (2015), More Than a Meal Pilot
Research Study, commissioned report prepared by Thomas & Dosa. https://
www.mealsonwheelsamerica.org/learn-more/research/more-than-a-meal/
pilot-research-study.
The OAA Nutrition Program is an essential linchpin in supporting
the healthy aging process for millions of Americans. But its
effectiveness in making a dent in the national dual crises of senior
hunger and social isolation depends on being adequately funded. The
reality of senior hunger and isolation in our Country is sobering. 12
million older adults aged 60+ worry about having enough food (i.e., are
marginally food insecure). This was an increase of 2.2 million over
2021. \7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ See note 4.
While daunting, even one individual struggling with hunger is far
too many. With the issue being pervasive in American communities and
additional challenges fast approaching with the growth of our senior
population, there is no time to wait for action. The number of OAA
meals and seniors we are able to serve nationwide, however, has failed
to keep pace with demographic shifts, growing demand, and the rising
costs of food, transportation, and other expenses. While we currently
serve 251 million nutritious home-delivered and congregate meals
annually to the 2.2 million older adults facing hunger and isolation,
we have the infrastructure and know-how to reach millions more,
especially through increased appropriations and a strong and timely
reauthorization. \8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Administration for Community Living/Administration on Aging
(2023), State Program Report (SPR) 2021, available on ACL's Aging,
Independence, and Disability Program Data Portal (AGID) at: https://
agid.acl.gov/.
The Costs and Consequences of Senior Hunger and Social Isolation
Today, millions of seniors are experiencing some degree of food
insecurity and/or social isolation, leaving them at risk for a
multitude of adverse health issues. Food-insecure older adults
experience worse health outcomes than food-secure seniors, with greater
risk for heart disease, depression, and decline in cognitive function
and mobility. \9\ Some of the most vulnerable seniors that the OAA
serves--those who are frail, homebound, and socially isolated--rely on
the home-delivered meal program. Despite the well-founded, inextricable
link between healthy aging and access to nutritious food and regular
socialization, millions of seniors struggle to meet these basic human
needs. The infrastructure and cost-effective interventions to address
these consequences already exist through the OAA network. As stated
above, local, community-based organizations serve a critical role in
addressing the nutritional and social needs of our Nation's older
adults. The impact of these services on seniors' lives is powerful.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Ziliak and Gunderson (2021), The Health Consequences of Senior
Hunger in the United States: Evidence from the 1999-2016 NHANES, report
prepared for Feeding America. www.feedingamerica.org/research/senior-
hunger-research/senior.
Most seniors receiving OAA nutrition services from senior nutrition
programs consistently report that participating in the program helps
them feel more secure, helps them eat healthier foods, prevents falls
or fear of falling, and allows them to stay in their own homes. In
turn, this helps avoid preventable emergency room visits, hospital
admissions and readmissions, and extended rehab stays, preventing
premature institutionalization and ultimately reducing our Nation's
health care costs. The cost of not providing these services and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
increasing funding is clear.
Currently, almost 95 percent of older adults have at least one
chronic condition, while nearly 80 percent have two or more chronic
conditions. \10\ Increasingly, older adults need access to nutritious
meals and comprehensive services that can help them manage their
chronic conditions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ National Council on Aging (April 2022), Chronic Inequities:
Measuring Disease Cost Burden Among Older Adults in the U.S. A Health
and Retirement Study Analysis. https://ncoa.org/article/the-inequities-
in-the-cost-of-chronic-disease-why-it-matters-for-older-adults.
Malnutrition, senior falls, and social isolation tell a similar
story. The economic burden of senior malnutrition alone costs $51.3
billion annually (in 2010 dollars), while senior falls account for $50
billion (in 2015 dollars). \11\, \12\ Studies show the highest rates of
social isolation are found among older adults, putting seniors at risk
for high blood pressure, heart disease, obesity, a weakened immune
system, anxiety, depression, cognitive decline, Alzheimer's disease,
and even death. Research demonstrates that social isolation among older
adults leads to an extra $6.7 billion in Medicare spending a year (in
2012 dollars) similar expenditures to that of having high blood
pressure or arthritis.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Snider, et al. (2014), Economic Burden of Community-Based
Disease-Associated Malnutrition in the United States. Journal of
Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition, 38(2S), 77S-85S. https://doi.org/
10.1177/0148607114550000.
\12\ Thomas, et al. (2018), Home-Delivered Meals and Risk of Self-
Reported Falls: Results From a Randomized Trial. Journal of Applied
Gerontology, 37(1), 41-57. https://doi.org/10.1177/0733464816675421.
The Case for Meals on Wheels and the Older Americans Act
As noted throughout this testimony, Meals on Wheels is a proven
solution that addresses the escalating issues of senior hunger and
isolation. We know this not only through the daily anecdotes we hear of
how Meals on Wheels has impacted people's lives, but through decades of
research. Our recently released report, The Case for Meals on Wheels:
An Evidence-Based Solution to Senior Hunger and Isolation, showcases
consistent findings that Meals on Wheels improves senior health,
safety, social connection, and more while saving taxpayer dollars. \13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Meals on Wheels America (September 2023), The Case for Meals
on Wheels: An Evidence-Based Solution to Senior Hunger and Isolation.
https://www.mealsonwheelsamerica.org/learn-more/research/the-case-for-
meals-on-wheels-sept23.
The Case for Meals on Wheels analyzed a total of 38 studies,
spanning 1996 to 2023, and found they consistently reported that Meals
on Wheels programs reduce healthcare utilization and costs, falls,
nursing home use, social isolation and loneliness while improving food
security, diet quality, and nutritional status and seniors' ability to
age in place. These remarkable outcomes, highlighted below, underscore
the life-changing impact that Meals on Wheels services have on the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
lives of the older adults we serve:
1. Reduced use of costly health care services: Several studies
found Meals on Wheels program participants needed fewer visits
to the emergency room or experienced fewer hospital stays or
readmissions.
2. Reduced nursing home use and increased ability to age in
place: Access to medically tailored and home-delivered meals
allowed individuals to stay in their homes rather than transfer
to a nursing facility for nutritional support. Nearly all (92
percent) home-delivered meal participants said the meals help
them continue to live independently, according to the 2022
national survey of Older Americans Act Title III home-delivered
meal participants.
3. Reduced health care costs attributed to reduced hospital and
nursing home spending: In line with outcomes one and two, their
reduced health care and nursing home use also meant Meals on
Wheels participants spent less on health care. One study found
that among individuals receiving medically tailored meals,
average medical expenditures were 40 percent lower per month
for those receiving meals than for a matched group not
receiving meals ($843 vs. $1,413).
4. Increased food security: Several studies concluded that
home-delivered meal participants worried less about having
enough to eat. Those individuals who received breakfast and
lunch deliveries, rather than just lunch, benefited even more.
5. Improved diet quality: Home-delivered meals led to higher-
quality diets among participants, as measured by nutrient
intake, calories, vitamins, and other indicators. Participant
feedback reinforced that meal delivery helped them eat
healthier, more nourishing foods.
6. Reduced or slow decline in nutritional risk: Program
participants threatened by malnutrition saw improvement in
their nutritional risk scores. Individuals benefited from both
improved dietary intake and improved food security.
7. Reduced social isolation and loneliness: Several studies
found a link between home-delivered meals and reduced social
isolation or loneliness, particularly among participants who
lived alone. These benefits resulted from contact with drivers
during meal deliveries and opportunities for social connection
via other Meals on Wheels programs.
8. Reduced falls and increased home safety: Several studies
found Meals on Wheels participants experienced fewer falls and
minimized exposure to hazards in the home, outcomes
attributable to safety checks provided at meal delivery, and a
reduced need to cook in the kitchen.
This research alone cannot bring these evidence-based programs to
the older adults who desperately need them. Seniors' access to these
critical services is only possible with the support of Congress and
sufficient Federal funding. This report illuminates the impact that
Meals on Wheels has and the necessity to protect and increase Federal
funding to meet the current needs of our growing senior population.
Older Americans Act Reauthorization Priorities
While the need for far greater Federal funding is the primary key
to serving more seniors, especially in the years following the COVID-19
pandemic, there are opportunities to ease administrative burdens and
improve our insight into the performance and operations of the network
at all levels. The Act, including the Nutrition Program, must continue
to be robust and successful and fulfill its original intent and core
purpose to reduce hunger, promote socialization, and improve health and
well-being for older adults in greatest social and economic need.
Any policy changes must, first and foremost, do no harm to the
aging services network and the seniors they support. Instead, they must
address the pervasive and growing challenges of senior hunger and
social isolation. We believe reauthorization should also build on the
newly updated OAA regulations by modernizing the law and reflecting the
on-the-ground needs of service providers, older adults, and their
families and caregivers. Accordingly, Meals on Wheels America urges
Congress to enact the following recommendations:
1. Increase authorization funding levels for all OAA programs and
provide additional resources for enhanced nutrition services.
Increase authorized funding, including sufficient
funding for Title III Nutrition Services, to address existing
waiting lists and reach the ever-growing number of older adults
who would benefit from OAA programs.
Authorize new funding streams and establish
incentives for senior nutrition programs to offer medically
tailored and/or culturally appropriate meals and expand reach
in underserved areas.
Improve and clarify authorization of funding for
senior nutrition programs to maintain and invest in the
infrastructure and resources needed to prepare and deliver
services, including kitchen equipment, delivery vehicles,
labor, etc.
2. Unify OAA Congregate, Home-Delivered and the Nutrition Services
Incentive Program into a single Title III-C Nutrition Program.
Create one authorized funding stream to remove
administrative burden, improve efficiency, and enable
community-based organizations to tailor nutrition services to
seniors' needs more easily.
Codify alternative nutrition services models, such as
grab-and-go and drive-thru meals, proven to reach more older
adults struggling with hunger and social isolation.
Modernize the Nutrition Services Incentive Program
through enhanced partnership and coordination with USDA, HHS,
states, Area Agencies on Aging (AAA), and local providers to
procure commodity foods for preparing OAA meals and coordinate
other important Federal benefits and programs for seniors.
3. Prioritize community-based nutrition programs and experienced
network providers in OAA grant awards and contracts.
Encourage states and AAAs to partner more closely
with and leverage senior nutrition programs' established
infrastructure, dedicated volunteer base, and experience
serving their communities to deliver nutritious meals,
socialization services, and safety checks to more older adults.
Ensure timely payment and reimbursement processes for
nutrition services provided.
4. Expand senior nutrition program capacity and infrastructure
support for further integration into the health care system.
Reduce administrative and regulatory burdens on local
nutrition and aging services providers seeking to establish
contracts and partnerships with health care providers and
payors.
Provide additional resources and promote incentives
for the aging services network to build the capacity, including
infrastructure and technology, to meet the compliance and
privacy standards for providing covered health care benefits.
5. Promote innovations and successful practices learned during the
COVID-19 pandemic.
Facilitate continued innovation and implementation of
many successful practices leveraged during the COVID-19 public
health emergency, including new partnerships, programming,
emergency preparedness and outreach.
Support the expansion of evidence-informed and/or
technology-based solutions that can help meet the needs of
seniors, including their preferences for meals and social
connectedness.
In addition to improvements through reauthorization, our
organization and network of senior nutrition providers are pleased with
the recent effort to update Federal regulations for OAA policies and
programs for Titles III, VI, and VII for the first time in 36 years.
\14\ As a result, they are now better aligned with language and
additions from recent reauthorizations and better reflect the needs of
today's growing and diversifying older adult population.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ ACL (February 2024), Final Rule : Older
Americans Act: Grants to State and Community Programs on Aging; Grants
to Indian Tribes and Native Hawaiian Grantees for Supportive,
Nutrition, and Caregiver Services; Grants for Supportive and
Nutritional Services to Older Hawaiian Natives; and Allotments for
Vulnerable Elder Rights Protection Activities. https://
www.Federalregister.gov/documents/2024/02/14/2024-01913/older-
americans-act-grants-to-state-and-community-programs-on-aging-grants-
to-indian-tribes-and.
Among the several updated policies we look forward to being
implemented, we remain supportive of the following nutrition-related
provisions that are included and/or clarified per ACL's final rule
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
(effective Friday, March 15, 2024):
Home-delivered meals--and a certain amount of
congregate meals--may be provided via home delivery, pick-up,
carry-out, or drive-through.
Eligibility for home-delivered meals is not limited
to people who are ``homebound;'' criteria may depend upon many
factors (including ability to leave home unassisted, ability to
shop for and prepare nutritious meals, mental health, degree of
disability or other relevant factors about their need for the
service, including social and economic need).
Requirements regarding the use and transfer of
funding for Title III programs, including clarification under
Title III C-1 and C-2 that funds can be used for nutrition
education, nutrition counseling, and other nutrition services,
as well as cautioning against transitioning money away from
Title III-B and Title III-C services for which they were
appropriated and intended by Congress.
States have the option to receive NSIP allocation
grants as cash, commodities or a combination of both, and that
funds can only be used to purchase domestically produced foods
used in meals.
We are encouraged to see much consideration and modernization of
OAA regulations through this regulatory process. Nonetheless,
regulatory updates and guidance can only achieve so much and look
forward to addressing remaining policy priorities and making further
legislative improvements during this OAA reauthorization process.
Conclusion
Thank you for holding this timely hearing and inviting me to
testify before you. I appreciate the chance to share how the OAA
improves the lives of senior citizens, communities, and our Nation. I
would like to extend a special thanks to Chairman Sanders for his
leadership on the OAA in past reauthorizations and in seeking increased
funding. And I want to thank all Members of the Committee for sharing
the belief that no senior in America should be left hungry or isolated.
I hope the information I provided today is helpful as you consider the
next reauthorization and look forward to working together to make this
vision a reality for our older adults. Thank you again for your time,
and I am pleased to answer any questions you might have.
______

The Foundation of the Older Americans Act: Meals on Wheels programs
serve as a direct lifeline to older adults struggling with food
insecurity, malnutrition, mobility, loneliness, and countless other
difficulties of aging. In 2021, local, community-based programs
supported by Federal funding from the Older Americans Act (OAA)
delivered 251 million meals to 2.2 million of our Nation's seniors in
greatest social and economic need.
OAA Reauthorization Priorities and Recommendations: Our
recommendations are designed to protect the core purposes of the Act,
underscore its importance as a solution to end senior hunger and social
isolation, ensure it is sufficiently funded, and does no harm to
seniors or the aging network. Our priorities include:
Increasing authorization funding levels for all OAA
programs and providing additional resources for enhanced
nutrition services
Unifying OAA Congregate, Home-Delivered and the
Nutrition Services Incentive Program into a single Title III-C
Nutrition Program
Prioritizing community-based nutrition programs and
experienced network providers in OAA grant awards and contracts
Expanding senior nutrition program capacity and
infrastructure support for further integration into the health
care system
Promoting innovations and successful practices
learned during the COVID-19 pandemic
Understanding the Unmet Needs of Our Growing Senior Population:
Waitlists for OAA nutrition services aren't an accurate picture of
total need; waitlists measure pent-up demand, not unmet need.
One in three local Meals on Wheels programs currently
maintain waiting lists, with seniors waiting on average 3
months for vital meals and 97 percent of Meals on Wheels
programs indicate they believe that there is unmet need in
their communities
Eight out of ten (80.3 percent) low-income, food
insecure older adults are not receiving the congregate or home-
delivered meals that they are eligible for and likely need
The Critical Role of OAA Nutrition Programs: Local, community-based
organizations serve a critical role in addressing the nutritional and
social needs of our Nation's older adults. Most seniors receiving OAA
nutrition services report that participating in the program helps them
feel more secure, prevents falls or fear of falling, and allows them to
stay in their own homes. The impact not only saves lives but also saves
taxpayer dollars by ensuring that our Nation's seniors can live healthy
at home and out of other more costly healthcare settings, helping to
avoid preventable emergency room visits, hospital admissions and
readmissions, and extended rehab stays, ultimately reducing our
Nation's health care costs.
Nearly all (92 percent) home-delivered meal
participants said the meals help them continue to live
independently
One study found that among individuals receiving
medically tailored meals, average medical expenditures were 40
percent lower per month for those receiving meals than for a
matched group not receiving meals ($843 vs. $1,413)
The economic burden of senior malnutrition alone
costs $51.3 billion annually (in 2010 dollars), while senior
falls account for $50 billion (in 2015 dollars)
Almost 95 percent of older adults have at least one
chronic condition, while nearly 80 percent have two or more
chronic conditions. It is estimated that $73 billion in January
2024 dollars is spent annually on disease-associated conditions
The Case for Meals on Wheels: The Case for Meals on Wheels: An
Evidence-Based Solution to Senior Hunger and Isolation found that Meals
on Wheels programs reduce healthcare utilization and costs, falls,
nursing home use, social isolation and loneliness while improving food
security, diet quality, and nutritional status and seniors' ability to
age in place. Meals on Wheels services: reduce use of costly health
care service; reduce nursing home use and increased ability to age in
place; reduce health care costs attributed to reduced hospital and
nursing home spending; increase food security; improve diet quality;
reduce or slow decline in nutritional risk; and reduce social isolation
and loneliness.
______
The Chair. Thank you very much, Ms. Hollander. Our next
witness is Dr. Martha Kubik, Professor of Nursing at George
Mason University. She will be introduced by Senator Kaine.
Senator Kaine. Thank you, Chairman and Ranking Member for
stacking this panel. Four of the five are from Virginia. We
don't demand 100 percent, but this ratio seems very acceptable
to me. I will be glad to introduce Dr. Marti Kubik, who is a
Professor of Nursing in the College of Public Health at George
Mason University close by in Fairfax.
Dr. Kubik is a behavioral epidemiologist and advanced
practice nurse with over 20 years of community based primary
care experience as a nurse practitioner. She has extensively
researched health promotion and disease preventions across the
lifespan, with a particular focus on low income and minority
populations.
Her testimony will focus on a pilot program connecting pre-
licensed nursing students with older adults at congregate meal
sites in Washington, DC. and Kentucky. Dr. Kubik, welcome.
STATEMENT OF MARTHA Y. KUBIK, PH.D., RN, FAAN, PRO-
FESSOR OF NURSING, COLLEGE OF PUBLIC HEALTH,
GEORGE MASON UNIVERSITY, FAIRFAX, VA
Dr. Kubik. Thank you, Dr. Kaine. I appreciate the
introduction. Thank you, Committee, for allowing me to visit
this morning to the Committee and share the work and testify
about the reauthorization of the Older Americans Act.
The Congregate Nutrition Services Section of the OAA, as
you all know, provide seniors a nutritious meal in a familiar
and easy to reach community setting. As a result, we have a
unique national network of trust in gathering places for
seniors.
Expanding services at these sites to address the
increasingly complex health and social needs of a burgeoning
and aging population, most with multiple chronic conditions as
has already been noted by many, is one approach to help seniors
age well and age in place.
As the older adult population continues to boom, access to
primary care health services remains problematic, contributing
to poor health outcomes and increase hospitalizations, as has
been noted by Senator Sanders.
Establishing academic practice partnerships between senior
centers and dining sites, and health professions schools, and
particularly schools of nursing, to bring students to the
community sites to provide health services holds great
potential to improve health outcomes, while at the same time
preparing a health workforce better equipped to meet the needs
of community residing adults for years to come.
My funding partner, the National Foundation to End Senior
Hunger, recently supported two proof of concept studies that I
have led. One here in the District of Columbia that we
completed last year, and the other in eastern Kentucky, which
is currently ongoing and will wrap up May 2024.
Both were conducted in partnership with district or state
level departments of aging, community nonprofits here in the
district, Area Agencies on Aging in Kentucky, senior centers
and dining sites, 6 per each of the locations for a total of
12, and local nursing programs, 2 at each location for a total
of 4.
The faculty supervised pre-licensure nursing students, so
students studying to be registered nurses typically in their
last year of studies, delivered the program that we call
ageWELL once weekly for 6 to 12 weeks at 5 of the 12 sites that
we randomly selected.
Health services included one on one visits between a senior
and a nursing student with a focus on medication management,
blood pressure assessment, and health coaching guided by the
senior's priorities and goals.
Other services delivered in an interactive group setting
were focused primarily on healthy eating strategies and
physical activity. Across sites both in the district and in
Kentucky, nursing student engagement and program participation
and satisfaction among seniors has been high. Outcomes are
pending in Kentucky.
In the district, most of the seniors who participated in
the ageWELL program self-reported improved diets and increased
physical activity. Blood pressure that we measured before and
after we delivered the ageWELL program, across all six sites,
not just the sites where we delivered the program, demonstrated
a 5.9mm of mercury decrease and systolic blood pressure.
We were able to lower the top number of the blood pressure
by six points that favored the ageWELL group. While this was
not a statistically significant difference in our study, likely
due to the small sample size and the pilot nature, it is
nonetheless very promising and merits further study. In
closing, our study results support feasibility, acceptability,
and potential of the ageWELL program to improve chronic disease
self-management for seniors.
The time is right to expand services for the older adults
that access community dining sites and senior centers and the
congregate meal program.
In reauthorizing the OAA, we encourage the Committee to
include support for further study of the ageWELL approach, so
as to assess program effectiveness on health comes, such as
blood pressure, and also scalability.
Thank you for your opportunity to speak today, and I am
happy to answer questions.

prepared statement of martha kubik
The Congregate Nutrition Services section of the Older Americans
Act provides nutritious meals, health promotion programming and social
engagement for seniors (age 60 and older) in congregate dining sites in
a variety of neighborhood locations throughout the U.S., creating a
unique national network of trusted gathering places for older adults.
Expanding services at dining sites to address the increasingly complex
health and social needs of a burgeoning aging population, most with
multiple chronic conditions, is one approach to help seniors age well,
while aging in place. The time is right to explore new partnerships and
more curated programming for the older adults that access community
dining sites and the congregate nutrition program.
Study Locations
The ageWELL proof of concept studies were funded by the National
Foundation to End Senior Hunger. An academic practice partnership model
was used to engage local nursing schools to bring faculty-supervised,
prelicensure nursing students to senior centers/dining sites to provide
health services to seniors to improve self-management of health,
wellness and chronic conditions. The study was initially piloted in the
District of Columbia (2022-2023) in partnership with the Department of
Aging and Community Living, four local community-based nonprofit
agencies, two university-based nursing programs and six community
dining sites/senior centers, representing five of the district's eight
wards. The study is presently being replicated in eastern Kentucky
(2023-2024) in partnership with the University of Kentucky (research
partner), KY Department of Aging and Independent Living, three Area
Agencies on Aging, six senior centers and two university-based nursing
programs.
Given the pilot nature of the study and funding and staffing
constraints, the number of study sites at each location was limited to
six. With the small sample size, the study was not powered (lacked a
large enough sample) to detect a difference in health outcomes between
groups, even if a difference was present. However, the pilot allowed
evaluation of proof of concept, and an assessment of feasibility,
acceptability and potential of the ageWELL program and an academic
practice partnership model to improve program participants' self-
management of health, wellness and chronic disease conditions.
The study's principal investigator (PI) is Martha (Marti) Kubik,
Ph.D., RN, FAAN, a professor of nursing at George Mason University
(GMU). For the District of Columbia study site, the GMU Institutional
Review Board (IRB) approved the research study. The study period was 8/
1/2022 to 9/30/2023.
For the Kentucky study, Martha Biddle, Ph.D., APRN, CCNS, FAHA,
Professor, College of Nursing, University of Kentucky (UK), is the site
PI. The UK IRB approved the research study. The study period is 9/1/
2023 to 8/31/2024.
Study Sample and Study Design
The pilot studies used a two-group randomized controlled trial
design. Dining sites were randomly selected to continue usual
programming or supplement usual programming with ageWELL. This allowed
a comparison of health outcomes (i.e. blood pressure) between the two
groups. Randomization of dining sites occurred within pairs matched by
shared group characteristics such as type of site and geographic
location. Meal program participants across dining sites were also
invited to take part in evaluation activities that included measuring
blood pressure, height, weight and completing a survey, before
(baseline) and after (follow-up) implementation of the 6-12 week
ageWELL program. Program participants also completed a satisfaction
survey. Nursing students documented their engagement with seniors
(service counts) and following the program, completed an evaluation of
the dining site experience.
Across locations, faculty-supervised, prelicensure nursing students
delivered the ageWELL program once weekly for 6-12 weeks at 5 of the 12
sites. Health services included one-on-one visits between a senior and
nursing student with a focus on management of medication, blood
pressure assessment, and health coaching guided by the senior's
priorities and goals. Other services, delivered in an interactive group
setting, were focused mostly on healthy eating strategies and physical
activity.
Among seniors (N=392) completing baseline measurement (DC=215;
KY=177), most were female, lived alone, with average age 74 years. In
DC, 94 percent were non-Hispanic Black; in KY, 98 percent were non-
Hispanic White, with 54 percent and 72 percent, respectively, reporting
 high school education. In DC, 189 seniors were measured following
the nursing student program for an 88 percent retention rate. A brief
summary of DC outcomes follows. KY outcomes are pending program
completion and final measurement in May 2024.
Outcomes: DC study
Across the DC sites, there were 627 service counts, including
tailored (57 percent) and targeted (22 percent) services and a health
fair (21 percent). Most seniors participated weekly or twice monthly,
with satisfaction with programming and nursing student engagement high.
Nursing students were productive and engaged, with most reporting a
better understanding of the health needs of community-residing older
adults following the experience. Dining site leadership, nursing
administrators and clinical faculty were interested in continuing the
partnership and ageWELL programming. The small sample size limited
evaluation of health outcomes. However, a decrease in systolic blood
pressure of 5.9 mm Hg following the program that favored ageWELL
compared to usual program participants was promising and merits further
evaluation.
Conclusion
Study results from the DC pilot support proof of concept and
feasibility, acceptability and potential of the ageWELL program to
improve senior's self-management of health, wellness and chronic
conditions. The DC pilot also confirmed the feasibility of conducting a
fully powered randomized control trial to determine effectiveness of
the ageWELL program to improve health outcomes. Finally, the KY pilot
demonstrates potential for scalability and generalization across
diverse populations of older adults.
______

Thank you for the opportunity to speak with the Committee about my
work and testify about the reauthorization of the Older Americans Act
(OAA). The Congregate Nutrition Services section of the OAA provides
seniors a nutritious meal in a familiar and easy-to-reach community
setting, resulting in a unique national network of trusted gathering
places for seniors. Expanding services at these sites to address the
increasingly complex health and social needs of a burgeoning aging
population, most with multiple chronic conditions, is one approach to
help seniors age well, while aging in place.
As the older adult population continues to `boom,' access to
primary care health services remains problematic, contributing to poor
health outcomes and increased hospitalizations. Establishing academic
practice partnerships between senior centers and dining sites and
health profession schools, and particularly schools of nursing, to
bring students to the community sites to provide health services holds
great potential to improve health outcomes, while also preparing a
health workforce better equipped to meet the needs of community-
residing older adults, for years to come.
My funding partner, the National Foundation to End Senior Hunger
recently supported two proof of concept studies that I led, one in the
District of Columbia (2022-2023), the other in eastern Kentucky (2023-
2024). Both were conducted in partnership with district/state-level
Departments of Aging, community nonprofits (DC), Area Agencies on Aging
(KY), senior centers/dining sites (six per location) and local nursing
schools (two per location). Faculty-supervised, prelicensure nursing
students delivered the program (called ageWELL) once weekly for 6-12
weeks at 5 of the 12 sites (random selection). Health services included
one-on-one visits between a senior and nursing student with a focus on
medication management, blood pressure assessment, and health coaching
guided by the senior's priorities and goals; other services, delivered
in an interactive group setting, were focused mostly on healthy eating
strategies and physical activity.
Across sites, nursing student engagement and program participation
and satisfaction among seniors has been high. Outcomes are pending in
Kentucky. In the District, most seniors reported improved diets and
increased physical activity. Blood pressure measured before/after the
program demonstrated a 5.9 mm Hg decrease in systolic blood pressure
that favored the ageWELL group. While not a statistically significant
difference, likely due to the small sample size, it is promising and
merits further study.
In closing, our study results support feasibility, acceptability
and potential of the ageWELL program to improve chronic disease self-
management for seniors. The time is right to expand services for the
older adults that access community dining sites and the congregate meal
program. In reauthorizing the OAA, we encourage the Committee to
include support for further study of the ageWELL approach so as to
assess program effectiveness on health outcomes, such as blood
pressure, as well as scalability.
Thank you again for the opportunity to speak today. I am happy to
answer questions.
______
The Chair. Well, thank you very much, Dr. Kubik. Our next
witness is Ms. Dorothy Hutchins from Alexandria, Virginia. And
Senator Kaine is going to introduce his fellow Virginian.
Senator Kaine. Thank you, Chairman. And Ms. Hutchins, it is
so great to see you. Dorothy Hutchins is 93 years old, and she
joins us virtually from her home in nearby Alexandria. Dorothy
has had a full life.
In her testimony, we are going to hear about her career as
a geologist and her journey raising 5 children, 17
grandchildren, and now 27 great grandchildren. She receives
Older Americans Act services through one of our state's
regional Area Agencies on Aging, the Fairfax Agency on Aging.
This network of the agencies does superb work. And the
services that she receives, like socialization provided at
senior centers and nutritious meals through Meals on Wheels
help her remain independent in her own home. Ms. Hutchins, it
is great to have you here with us today. Unmute.

Senator Kaine. Ms. Hutchins, we are still having a hard
time hearing you. I don't know whether it is your end or our
end. Nope. And Ms. Hutchins has some kind of staff assistant
there with her. Perhaps, Mr. Chair, we should move to the fifth
witness and then circle back to Ms. Hutchins? Should we try
that?
The Chair. We can do that.
Senator Cassidy. I think staff assistance is a euphemism
for grandchild.

Senator Kaine. If only I could get assistance----
Senator Kaine. Before we get back to Ms. Hutchins, let's go
to our final witness, Ms. Michelle Branham. She will be
recognized by Senator Cassidy.
Senator Cassidy. Yes. A pleasure to introduce Secretary
Michelle Branham, appointed by Governor Ron DeSantis to serve
as the agency head for the Department of Elder Services in
December 2021.
Under her leadership, the department serves Florida's 6.3
million seniors over the age of 60, providing services and
supporting initiatives through Florida's Aging Network to help
those seniors live well and age well in their state.
Prior to that, I could just go through a whole list of ways
that she has been involved serving those with Alzheimer's,
addressing the needs, understanding, otherwise helping our
society as a whole address Alzheimer's. So, Secretary Branham,
thank you for being with us.
STATEMENT OF MICHELLE BRANHAM, SECRETARY, FLORIDA
DEPARTMENT OF ELDER AFFAIRS, TALLAHASSEE, FL
Ms. Branham. Thank you, sir. Chairman Sanders, Ranking
Member Cassidy, esteemed Committee Members and fellow
panelists, I truly appreciate the opportunity to discuss how
Florida champions seniors and the important role of the Older
Americans Act in supporting our cherished elders.
I spent my first year and a half as Secretary on the road
in the senior centers and adult day centers, working with our
providers, as we have all mentioned. It is really exciting for
us to share our story because, as we may already know, we are
either seniors or we are seniors in the making.
If we are blessed to continue aging, it is imperative that
we provide not only the seniors now, but the seniors of
tomorrow the brightest and best possible future. Florida
remains a top destination for seniors, as you mentioned, with
over 6.3 million residents aged 60 and above.
We rank among the Nation's fastest growing and the third
most populous state. And as the Secretary of the Florida
Department of Elder Affairs, I am truly grateful for Governor
Ron DeSantis' ongoing and steadfast commitment to prioritizing
our seniors.
At our agency, we take great pride in leading the charge
and ensuring the dignity, independence, and fulfillment of
seniors in Florida. Serving as a designated standalone state
unit on aging, and that is a distinction not many states have,
our goal is to provide an environment where seniors can
maintain their independence within their homes for as long as
possible, thereby creating a happier, healthier lifestyle,
while also promoting fiscal responsibility as aging in place is
considerably more cost effective.
Under the leadership of Governor DeSantis, Florida excels
nationally in addressing Alzheimer's and other related
dementias, with pioneering initiatives, a first of the Nation
mobile outreach program, and significant state funding each
year, thus reflecting our commitment to those impacted by
Alzheimer's and related dementia. And you just said Senator
Cassidy, that is near and dear to my heart.
Our agency oversees $511 million in state and Federal
funding, and that is including $154 million from the Older
Americans Act, aiming to enable older adults to age well and
live well in the place of their choosing, thus contributing to
Florida's vibrant communities through our collective efforts
with our Aging Network. As you know, the OAA tailors a range of
services designed for seniors and caregivers.
These include, for us, in-home and community based support
services to address cognitive decline, individual needs,
fostering social connections, and ultimately reducing the
impact of loneliness, isolation, and depression.
This approach has resulted in significant increased
participation in our various programs and senior centers all
across Florida. And while the department continues to review
the new OAA rule and its potential impact, I urge Congress and
HHS to consider continuing to collaborate closely with states
to ensure these new regulations do not unnecessarily hinder the
process, especially in Florida over the past three decades.
Now I am just going to hit a few of the high points for the
Older Americans Act in Florida. Over our entire state, we are
witnessing increased participation in senior centers,
congregate meal sites, and adult day centers.
Last year alone, we provided more than 10 million meals in
Florida served through OAA. Supplemental services are also
available in Florida to caregivers of vulnerable individuals 60
and older, and grandparents that are providing care for
grandchildren.
Other types of services include home repairs, shore
assistant, respite care, and specialized support for elders
with Alzheimer's disease and related dementia. And one of my
favorite programs, I know we mentioned it, was the Senior
Community Center Service Employment Program, and that helps
older Floridians who face challenges in the job market or
reentering the job market.
The wonderful part of this program is that due to workforce
shortages, it also helps fill essential gaps in Florida's job
market with our vibrant seniors. So, I absolutely love this
program.
Our centralized long term care ombudsman program, among
other programs, plays a pivotal role in safeguarding our
seniors from abuse, neglect, fraud, and exploitation. And this
wonderful volunteer based program works tirelessly to protect,
defend, and advocate for Florida's seniors living in the
state's 4,000 long term care communities.
In summary, Florida is proud to be the most senior friendly
State in the country, with the Older Americans Act serving as
one of the most critical keystones of Florida's efforts to
support and protect Floridians as they continue to age.
As Secretary of the Department of Elder Affairs, I have
seen firsthand how our Governor has shown unwavering dedication
to seniors from his time in Congress, all the way through the
groundbreaking initiatives as Governor, like our Dementia
Action Plan and the Florida Alzheimer's Center of Excellence.
He has reinforced training standards for senior care,
increased funding for our memory disorder clinics throughout
the state, and enacted comprehensive reforms to Florida's
prescription drug market.
Florida, under his leadership, remains at the forefront of
next generation initiatives, program explorations, critical
funding, executive and legislative support, and collective
research that promotes not only aging but aging well for all
residents of the Sunshine State. I am happy to answer any
questions at this time. Thank you.

prepared statement of michelle branham
Introduction
Chairman Sanders, Ranking Member Cassidy, esteemed Committee
Members, and fellow panelists, I appreciate the opportunity to discuss
how Florida champions seniors and the important role of the Older
Americans Act in supporting our elderly population.
Florida, with over 6.3 million residents aged 60 and above, stands
as a premier haven for seniors, ranking among the Nation's fastest
growing and third most populous states. As the Secretary of the Florida
Department of Elder Affairs, I am truly grateful for Governor Ron
DeSantis' unwavering commitment to prioritizing our seniors.
Our agency is at the forefront, steering initiatives to ensure the
dignity, independence, and fulfillment of Florida's senior population.
Operating as the designated state unit on aging, our goal is to provide
an environment where seniors can maintain their independence within
their homes for as long as possible, fostering a contented, healthier
lifestyle while promoting fiscal responsibility.
Under the leadership of Governor Ron DeSantis, Florida leads
nationally in addressing Alzheimer's and other related dementias, with
pioneering initiatives, a first in the Nation mobile outreach program,
and significant funding increases, reflecting our commitment to those
impacted by Alzheimer's and related dementias. Our agency oversees $511
million in state and Federal funding, including $154 million from the
Older Americans Act, aiming to enable older adults to age in their
homes and contribute vibrantly to Florida's communities through our
collective efforts in the Aging Network.
Older Americans Act in Florida
As you know, the OAA tailors a range of services for seniors and
caregivers, providing in-home and community-based support to address
cognitive decline, individual needs, and foster social connections and
reduces isolation, which has led to increased participation in various
centers across Florida. While the Department continues to review the
new OAA rule and its potential fiscal impact, I urge Congress and HHS
to work closely with states to ensure these new regulations do not
unnecessarily hinder the progress Florida has made over the past three
decades.
Supportive Services
OAA funds provide crucial support for seniors, promoting
independence at home and in the community. Services encompass
transportation, outreach, and information, as well as in-home
assistance like homemaking, home health aide support, companionship,
and telephone reassurance. Additionally, services include home repairs,
chore assistance, respite care, and specialized support for families
facing Alzheimer's and related dementias.
Home-Delivered and Congregate Meals
In fiscal year 2022-2023, over 10 million OAA-funded meals were
provided, addressing the need for senior nutrition. Recognizing that a
meal is more than sustenance, these programs make a significant impact
on the lives of older residents. Home-delivered and congregate meals
not only enhance physical health but also combat loneliness and social
isolation, offering vital opportunities for socialization and
engagement. With over 300 congregate meal sites in Florida, thousands
of meals are served daily, fostering a sense of community and
connection for our elders.
Florida's Dementia Care and Cure Initiative (DCCI)
The Department of Elder Affairs and the Aging Network, mandated by
the Older Americans Act, play a crucial role in coordinating aging
services at the community level. Governor DeSantis showcases his
commitment through initiatives like the Dementia Care and Cure
Initiative (DCCI), addressing the significant impact of Alzheimer's in
Florida. The DCCI establishes Dementia-Caring Communities, providing
training and support. Governor DeSantis solidified this commitment with
a five-point Dementia Action Plan in 2019, leading to the recent
establishment of the Florida Alzheimer's Center for Excellence in June
2022. Operated through the Department of Elder Affairs, this center
marks a milestone in Florida's ongoing efforts against dementia,
serving as a template for other states.
Health and Wellness
Florida's health and wellness programs empower seniors and
caregivers with impactful interventions, fostering informed decision-
making and proactive health practices. These initiatives, emphasizing
medication management and lifestyle interventions, play a crucial role
in averting nursing home placements. By preventing and managing chronic
health conditions, these programs contribute to the sustained health
and vitality of Florida's aging population, aligning with the objective
of enabling older Americans to age in their preferred homes and
communities.
Caregiver Support
Through OAA, Florida caregivers receive tailored support, including
respite, adult day care, and assistance in health, nutrition, and
financial literacy for individuals aged 60 and older. Caregiver
Supplemental Services extend aid to caregivers of vulnerable
individuals aged 60 and older or grandparents caring for grandchildren.
Grandparent or Non-Parent Relative Support Services aid these
caregivers, providing training, child day care, counseling, legal aid,
and transportation.
Senior Community Service Employment Program (SCSEP)
The Senior Community Service Employment Program aids unemployed or
low-income Floridians aged 55 and older, addressing job market
challenges. With dual goals of community service job training and
transitioning participants to unsubsidized employment, the program
fosters economic self-sufficiency, contributing to Florida's workforce
vitality. A key aspect is filling workforce shortages, making it
mutually beneficial. Participants engage in community service
activities at non-profit and public agencies, gaining valuable
experience. In fiscal year 2022-2023, the Department received over $4.7
million in OAA funding to sustain this vital program.
Elder Abuse Prevention Program and Long-Term Care Ombudsman
Program (LTCOP)
The Elder Abuse Prevention and Long-Term Care Ombudsman Programs,
mandated by OAA Title VII in Florida, are pivotal in safeguarding
seniors from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. While not directly
involved in abuse investigations, the Department prioritizes prevention
and education initiatives, with coordinators disseminating information
statewide. The volunteer-driven Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program
advocates for individuals in long-term care, emphasizing abuse
prevention.
Prioritizing the Well-Being of Florida's Most Vulnerable Seniors
The OAA is a vital funding source for serving older Floridians,
emphasizing responsible fund utilization. Prioritizing vulnerable
seniors is facilitated by Population Maps, custom GIS maps for each
Area Agency on Aging. These maps, integrating census and client data,
identify concentrations of seniors needing assistance.
Summary
Florida proudly stands as the most senior-friendly state in the
country, with the Older Americans Act being a key element in our
efforts to address the needs of our seniors through their golden years.
As Secretary of the Department of Elder Affairs, I have seen firsthand
how Governor Ron DeSantis has shown unwavering dedication to seniors
from his time in Congress through his groundbreaking initiatives like
the Dementia Action Plan and the Florida Alzheimer's Center of
Excellence. He reinforced training standards for senior care, increased
funding for memory disorder clinics, and enacted comprehensive reforms
to Florida's prescription drug market. Florida, under his leadership,
sets a resolute example for other states to follow in prioritizing and
supporting seniors.
I am happy to answer any questions you may have. Thank you.
______

It is exciting for us to share our story, because, as you may know,
Florida remains the top destination for seniors, boasting a population
of over 6.3 million residents aged 60 and older out of our 22.2 million
residents. The Sunshine State is the second fastest-growing state in
the Nation, also ranking as the third most populous state in the
country and surpassing the populations of 15 other states combined.
It's amazing to think that every day, an estimated 1,000+ individuals
choose Florida as their new home; and nearly a quarter of these new
Floridians are aged 60 and older.
With this ever-growing senior population continuing to age in our
great state, I am proud to serve as the Secretary of the Florida
Department of Elder Affairs (DOEA) during this time of continued
advancement. Appointed by Governor Ron DeSantis in 2021, I have spent
these past years in the field working closely with our Area Agency on
Aging (AAAs) partners and their providers in our state's vast aging
network.
Governor DeSantis' ongoing and steadfast commitment to prioritizing
and supporting the needs of Florida's seniors has provided a well-
forged path for our Agency. His unwavering dedication to enhancing the
quality of life--for older adults across our state--underscores the
tremendous value he sets on aging in place. With his leadership,
Florida's mission continues to be that all of us--as we continue to get
older--live in the place of our choosing, for as long as we choose,
understanding that this essential concept undoubtedly frames our
overall happiness, wellness, and comfort in later years. With support
also from Florida's legislature, our Agency is empowered and funded to
advance initiatives and services that ensure dignity, independence, and
fulfillment of Florida's expansive senior population.
Our Agency plays a pivotal role as Florida's designated, stand-a-
lone state unit on aging, a distinction not shared by all states--but
further showcasing the immense value and importance placed on Florida's
older adults. We serve as the primary state agency for administering
human services and programs specifically tailored to meet the needs of
our cherished seniors. A primary objective at the Department is to
ensure our aging adults can maintain their independence, remaining in
the comfort of their own homes for as long as possible. This not only
fosters happier and healthier lives for us and our families as we age,
but also promotes fiscal responsibility in the state and its
communities--as aging in place is the most affordable and cost-
effective option in choosing how we live in later years.
The DOEA oversees more than $511 million in state and Federal
funding--including more than $154 million in funding from the Older
Americans Act (OAA). We partner with our 11 (AAAs), 48 Lead Agencies,
and thousands of direct service providers across Florida to assist
seniors with the OAA, other Federal funding, and state-funded programs
and services. This culmination of critical and collective offerings
aims to wrap support around our older adults and their families so that
our seniors can remain in their own homes as long as possible and
continue to be vibrant contributors to our state's communities, no
matter their age. Together, we lead Florida's Aging Network, leveling
up as a collective team to meet the needs of an ever-changing and often
difficult aging infrastructure that produced a host of challenges.
Across the Nation, all aging networks feel the systemic presence of
workforce shortages, senior homelessness, provider/lead agency
challenges and funding shortfalls. With this, we are convinced Florida
must work, not only to ensure we are monitoring our partners, but also
providing them with key tools and acumen to stand them up for success.
Our Agency, and our state, believe that leveling up together as an
aging network will continue to guide our pathway to excellence in our
service to seniors.
______
The Chair. Thank you very much. It appears that the
technical problems with Ms. Hutchins were at our end, not at
her end. And so, with that, we welcome back, Ms. Hutchins.
STATEMENT OF DOROTHY HUTCHINS, VIRGINIA OLDER
ADULT, ALEXANDRIA, VA
Ms. Hutchins. My name is Dorothy Hutchins. In July, I will
be 94 years old. I live alone, but I am blessed to have a large
supportive family. I have 5 children, 17 grandchildren, and 27
great grandchildren.
I started my career in 1952 as a young geologist, part of
the women's salary geologist at the time with the Geological
Survey. I wrote Gemstones of the United States under my maiden
name, Dorothy Schlegel in 1956.
One highlight of my career was mapping the Verde Quadrangle
in the deserts of Arizona. When my husband passed away in 1973,
I retired from geology and stayed home with my family. I have
gone on to live on services under the Older Americans Act since
the early 1990's.
I attended two different local senior centers, Lincolnia in
Alexandria and Bailey's in Falls Church. I was able to drive
myself. At the senior centers, I would play bridge, take
exercise classes, eat lunch with my peers, and participate in
events on holidays and special occasions. The work they do is
so important and should be available to all seniors.
I started attending the senior centers during COVID. During
that time, I found out that I was eligible to receive meals
delivered to my home. On Thursdays, six frozen dinners and six
lunches are delivered to my home.
The same young woman from Peru comes every week and we chat
a little. The food meets my needs and sometimes more than I can
eat in one sitting. I fell and hurt my hip in January 2021. I
then got surgery 1 week later.
After rehab, I came out and walked with a walker. Almost
exactly 1 year later, I fell again and had another show started
and rehab. I have had to be very cautious since my falls. I
don't wear shoes in my home.
I wear a life alert around my neck and only shower when
someone is in the house with me. I am fortunate to receive
occupational and physical therapy in my home. I since stopped
driving and can no longer attend the senior centers. I do get a
little lonely. I lost my husband early in our marriage and I am
an only child.
Most of our friends are dead. I have one friend in Syracuse
in a senior living community. But she pays $8,000 each month
and I can't afford that. I used to go to church every week, but
I don't go to church anymore in person. I am able to watch it
on my tablet.
I stay busy and I like to learn. I have a friend across the
street brings me The New York Times and Wall Street Journal
every day, and I get the Washington Post. I have plenty to
read. I also do the crosswords and watch a lot of TV.
I have been in my home for 61 years. Thanks to my family
support and services provided to me by the Fairfax area Agency
on Aging, I am able to be independent and continue to live in
my own home. I am also blessed not to have serious health
problems.
Everyone deserves a chance to live more of a great choose,
and for most of us, we want to remain in our home and
communities. The services provided under the Older Americans
Act make that possible for me and many other seniors.
I hope that Congress will continue to support this
important work. Thank you, and I am happy to answer your
questions.

prepared statement of dorothy hutchins
Chairman Sanders, Ranking Member Cassidy, and Members of the
Committee, thank you for inviting me to testify today. It is an honor
to be testifying from my home in Alexandria, Virginia, today.
My name is Dorothy Hutchins. In July, I will be 94 years old. I
live alone, but am blessed to have a large supportive family. I have 5
children, 17 grandchildren, and 27 great grandchildren.
I started my career in the 1952 as a young geologist, part of the
Women's Auxiliary Geologists at the time with the U.S. Geological
Survey. I wrote ``Gem stones of the United States'' under my maiden
name, Dorothy Schlegel, in 1956. One highlight of my career was mapping
the Verde quadrangle in the deserts of Arizona. When my husband passed
away in 1973, I retired from geology and stayed home with my family.
I have benefited from services under the Older Americans Act since
the early 1990's. I attended two different local senior centers,
Lincolnia in Alexandria and Bailey's in Falls Church, and was able to
drive myself. At the senior centers, I would play bridge, take exercise
classes, eat lunch with my peers, and participate in events on holidays
and special occasions. The work they do is so important and should be
available to all seniors.
I stopped attending the senior centers during COVID. During that
time I found out that I was eligible to receive meals delivered to my
home. On Thursdays, six frozen dinners and six lunches are delivered to
my home. The same young woman from Peru comes every week and we chat a
little. The food meets my needs and is sometimes more than I can eat in
one sitting.
I fell and hurt my hip in January 2021 and had surgery 1 week
later. After rehab I came home and walked with a walker. Almost exactly
1 year later I fell again and had another surgery and rehab. I have had
to be very cautious since my falls. I don't wear shoes in my home, I
wear a life alert around my neck, and only shower when someone is in
the house with me. I am fortunate to receive occupational and physical
therapy in my home.
I've since stopped driving and can no longer attend the senior
centers. I do get a little lonely. I lost my husband early in our
marriage and am an only child. Most of my friends are dead. I have one
friend in Syracuse in a senior living community, but she pays $8,000
each month and I can't afford that. I used to go to church every week,
but I don't go to church anymore in person. I am able to watch it on my
tablet though.
I stay busy and I like to learn. I have a friend across the street
who brings me his New York Times and Wall Street Journal every day and
I get the Washington Post. I have plenty to read. I also do the
crosswords and watch a lot of TV every day, too.
I have been in my home for 61 years. Thanks to my family's support
and the services provided to me by the Fairfax Area Agency on Aging, I
am able to be independent and continue to live in my own home. I am
also blessed not to have serious health problems.
Everyone deserves the chance to live where they choose, and for
most of us we want to remain in our homes and communities. The services
provided under the Older Americans Act make that possible for me and
many other seniors. I hope that Congress will continue to support this
important work.
Thank you and I'm happy to answer your questions.
______
The Chair. Well, thank you very much, Ms. Hutchins, and we
apologize for the technical problems. And you are a great
witness. We appreciate it. Now, we begin our round of
questions.
Let me start off with a very simple one to all of the
expert panelists who are here, and Ms. Hutchins can jump in as
well. What all of you have discussed is that we have a growing
senior population, we have millions of seniors who have hunger
issues, literally some dealing with malnutrition.
We have people who are staying home, who are lonely, who
are isolated. We have people who are falling, causing serious
injuries. Do any of you doubts that investing in prevention--I
mean, this is America.
I mean, we shouldn't be talking about the need to keep
seniors from going hungry. That should be a given, I would
hope, in the wealthiest country on earth. When we talk about
doubling funding for the Older Americans Act, yes, we are
talking about $2 billion, a lot of money.
Do any of you doubt that investment will not end up saving
taxpayers money by preventing hospitalizations or nursing home
visitation--nursing home care when people want to stay at home?
Let me start with Ms. Alwin and we will go right down the line.
Ms. Alwin. Well, thank you. Thank you for the question and
thank you for elevating the issue. For over 55 years, the Older
Americans Act has demonstrated a unique ability to provide
these robust services, and, frankly, protect and enhance some
of the other Federal resources.
The preventative service means savings for Medicare and
Medicaid. And on average, the Older Americans Act funding
represents less than one-third of 1 percent of all Federal
discretionary spending, and yet the return on investment is
amazing.
The local and state providers leverage other state
resources, local resources, philanthropic as well as
volunteers, providing services annually to over 11 million
older adults and their caregivers.
The Chair. My question is----
Ms. Alwin. Let's double----
The Chair . Is the investment going to save
money?
Ms. Alwin. It is absolutely going to save money.
The Chair. Okay.
Ms. Hollander.
Ms. Hollander. 100 percent. Absolutely. The best investment
that we can make. It is a program that has worked, and it is
continuing to keep people out of emergency departments,
readmissions, admissions, and premature nursing home
placements. It is a no brainer as far as I am concerned. You
invest more, you will get a huge return on that investment.
The Chair. All right. While you have the mic, let me ask
you this, in Vermont, and I think around the country, there are
waiting lines to get into the Meals on Wheels program. Can you
say a word about that?
Ms. Hollander. Well, the waiting list is because, the
resources aren't there. Programs are doing their very best to,
if they need to, cut back, scale back so they can serve more
seniors in need.
But the fact is that the resources have never kept pace.
You mentioned that earlier, about the reduction 20 percent over
time. And the population is growing, and we have never really
adjusted for inflation.
With the pandemic, of course, everything is more expensive.
All the things that are required to prepare, to deliver, to
procure meals and food to do it. But I think the other thing I
just want to mention real quick is it isn't just about the
meal, right?
It is about those people that are needing to have
socialization, social connectedness. Both of those have----
The Chair. Okay. I wanted to go down the line. Thanks very
much, Ms. Hollander.
Dr. Kubik.
Dr. Kubik. Yes. Senator Sanders, there is no question that,
preventing an issue is preferred over waiting until an issue
occurs. Unfortunately, our health care delivery system has
mostly been set up to respond to conditions rather than
prevent.
But as a public health professional, there is no question
in my mind that continued support of the OAA for food,
nutrition, and extended services is exactly what our seniors
and our growing population of seniors need in order to stay
home, and age well, and age in place.
The Chair. Thank you. Ms. Branham, does investing in
prevention save money long term?
Ms. Branham. Thank you, Senator Sanders. I think for us, we
just went through a workshop with our Area Agencies on Aging,
so I think maximizing the dollars that we have is something
that is critical to me.
Making sure that our Aging Network knows how to spend, has
the ability to spend, and the confidence to spend. So, right
now we are focusing on maximizing the dollars that we do have,
and I do think interventions are very helpful.
The Chair. Okay. Let me say a word. I have visited, as I
think probably every Senator here has, senior centers and
congregate meal programs. I love them. Are they getting the
resources they need to pay for the meals that they serve?
Ms. Alwin.
Ms. Alwin. Sure. With 12,000 people turning 65 every day,
there is increasing demand. And as was shared, it is tough to
keep up with the cost of inflation. There is growing demand,
there are growing costs.
We need to elevate the support and funding both for
congregate meals and home delivered. There is not enough
support.
The Chair. All right. My time is expiring. Last question,
in Vermont we have some senior centers that are doing really
great. Some are really struggling in the rural areas. They just
don't have the funding. Do we have the network of senior
centers all over this country, the robust network that we need
to satisfy the needs of seniors in general? Who wants to answer
that one? Yes.
Ms. Branham. Thank you, Senator. We have the network,
11,000 senior centers, but there is no designated funding
stream for senior centers.
A third, if they are fortunate, receive dollars from the
Area Agency on Aging, a third from Parks and Recreation, and
the final third are left to their own devices to fundraise and
scrape resources together. So, the quality of services, the
options available varies greatly by your zip code. It doesn't
have to be that way.
The Chair. Okay. Thank you very much.
Senator Cassidy.
Senator Cassidy. I defer to Senator Collins.
Senator Collins. Thank you very much, Dr. Cassidy. Dr.
Kubik, an issue that we, the panel has not discussed, but which
Mrs. Hutchins brought up is the problem of falls among our
seniors.
This often starts a spiral of downward health and is very
serious. The Older Americans Act Title 5 or 4, I guess it is,
does provide some funding to try to support health independence
and longevity activities.
I know in the State of Maine, the Aroostook County Area
Agency on Aging offers classes called a matter of balance,
which is evidence based. And the Bangor Y also offers similar
courses.
Can you tell me how important it is for us to try to ensure
that there is funding to support programs to prevent falls,
which can have such devastating consequences?
Dr. Kubik. Yes. Thank you, Senator Collins, for the
question. I think as our guest from Alexandria indicated, two
falls 2 years in a row and with, good health care, good medical
care, good support at home from an occupational therapist,
likely a physical therapist, she has been able to stay at home.
But again, as we bump up the number of us who are over the
age of 65, who are having varying levels of decline physically,
if we can prevent and maintain mobility, if we can maintain
safe mobility, if we can--what the nursing students have done
with the seniors is they take them for a walk, they accompany
them on a walk. And during those accompanying walks, you can
talk about safety.
You can talk about preventing falls. We also implemented
foot care at all the clinics. So, if you can take care of your
feet, you have a firmer base to walk on, which is often
overlooked when we go to primary care offices. So, I think it
is critical that we work and prioritize fall prevention among
our seniors.
Senator Collins. Thank you. Secretary Branham, welcome. We
have worked together on Alzheimer's disease in the past and it
is good to see you today. I want to talk about another issue
that has been alluded to but not focused on, and that is the
problem of widespread loneliness among American seniors.
We know that poses health risks that are as deadly as
smoking 15 cigarettes a day. Social isolation and loneliness
have been estimated to shorten a person's life span by as many
as 15 years, and loneliness and isolation have also been linked
to cognitive decline and an increased risk of dementia.
That problem was exacerbated during the pandemic, but even
before the pandemic, approximately one in four older Americans
suffered from loneliness. We tried to respond to this in the
2020 reauthorization of the older Americans Act, which I was a
coauthor, but I am interested in hearing from you what more we
could do.
Congregate feeding areas, meals, obviously help. Visits
from home health nurses help enormously to have wellness
checks, but also checking in. Delivering meals on wheels helps.
But what else would you suggest?
Ms. Branham. Thank you for the question, Senator Collins. I
loved working with you. I think that is a major issue, and
spending so much time in the field, seeing these vibrant senior
centers open with music and congregating and being together and
taking tai chi classes and mobility classes for falls
prevention, learning new things, learning IT, all of that has
done a tremendous job in improving because isolation,
loneliness, and depression is something that we saw even with
our most vulnerable population to a degree that was just so
sad. And I think there is so much more that we can do.
We talked about the companionship care, not just delivering
a meal, but sitting there, talking with the person, making that
meal more of an opportunity, an event, than just putting
something down there. So that has been tremendous.
Even with a more flexibility with OAA, being able to grab
and go and taking that home and maybe sitting down with a
person in a park, having those capabilities and flexibilities
with the new OAA rule has been significant and our Area
Agencies on Aging love that.
But I think making sure that we have senior centers that
are vibrant, adult day centers that are vibrant, help to
mitigate the impact of isolation, loneliness, and depression.
And there is absolutely more that we can continue to do.
Senator Collins. Thank you.
The Chair. Thank you, Senator Collins.
Senator Casey.
Senator Casey. Mr. Chairman, thanks very much for calling
this hearing. I want to thank you and Ranking Member Cassidy
for the work that goes into and your teams' work to the
planning of this hearing.
Of course, we want to thank our witnesses and thank both
the Committee leadership as well as our witnesses for uplifting
the Older Americans Act. A landmark piece of legislation that a
lot of Americans only hear about every few years, so it is
important for us to uplift it and celebrate how important it
is, but also to make sure that we get this reauthorization
right.
As Chairman of the Senate Aging Committee, I have worked on
a bipartisan basis with colleagues over many years now to
reauthorize the Older Americans Act before, and I am working
again, and I am grateful to be at the negotiating table once
more to begin this reauthorization process.
I think we can all agree, despite all of our divisions in
the Senate and the House, I think we can all agree that older
Americans deserve to age with dignity, and it is our
obligation--it is not optional. It is an obligation, to make
sure that we are doing everything possible to make that a
reality.
I wanted to start with Ms. Alwin and Ms. Hollander about
the question of the strategic plan for aging. As you both know,
our population is aging so rapidly, and your testimony
highlights that reality. Local communities and states still
need to be able to provide more services and more supports to
older adults in the years ahead.
We have heard testimony already, Ms. Hollander, about your
good work at Meals on Wheels, and Ms. Alwin, on the National
Council on Aging. Both provide invaluable services for older
adults and are critical to supporting our older adults as they
continue to age.
Across the country, states, including my home State of
Pennsylvania, have been working on multi-sector--so-called
multi-sector or master plans for aging. These plans bring
stakeholders, both public and private stakeholders, together to
coordinate service delivery and transform infrastructure to
better meet the needs of our aging population.
I recently introduced with Senator Gillibrand the Strategic
Plan for Aging Act. Our bill would provide funding for states
that are developing or implementing these long term care, or
long term plans I should say, for aging.
We want to thank both Meals on Wheels and NCOA for your
endorsement of the bill. I will be pushing to include this
legislation in the reauthorization of the Older Americans Act.
Start with Ms. Alwin. How could long term planning and
improved coordination across all levels of Government better
support states, local providers, and of course, the older
adults that they serve?
Ms. Alwin. Well, thank you, Senator. Thank you for the
question and for your leadership with the Special Committee on
Aging and with the important legislation that really elevates
lessons from these multi-sector plans.
We applaud that good innovation going on across the country
and recognize there is an opportunity to pull that through into
the reauthorization of the Older Americans Act. Because aging
well means addressing all the domains of aging well, and long
term planning around all the domains, as the multi-sector plans
have initiated, is really an important step to make the most of
the limited resources available and coordinate across Federal,
state, and local administering agencies.
We also applaud the great work of the Administration on
Community Living for leveraging the Inter Agency Coordinating
Council opportunity already made available through the Act,
really modeling that Federal coordination across the various
departments that states have initiated with the multi-sector
plans.
When those conversations and those stakeholders are around
the same table, we can have thoughtful conversations about the
demographic trends and provide more preventative services and
supports, bringing in a greater savings ultimately and
improving the quality of life.
Senator Casey. Thank you.
Ms. Hollander.
Ms. Hollander. I think Ramsey did a nice job of summarizing
the benefit of that. I would say, from someone who is actually
going through a strategic planning process for my own
organization, I know how important it is to make sure that
there is alignment, that all the stakeholders are at the table,
and that you are creating, a plan that is flexible and
adaptable because we have a very rapidly changing demographic
in our Country. It is an explosion.
As you know, we have just been talking about the senior
population, but there is also far greater diversity, and we
need to have plans at the state level that are able to flex to
that change.
I would just say that one of the things I think is really
important is rather than having individual plans, there has to
be some opportunity to look for cross organization--cross state
synergies to be able to leverage those synergies, those
learnings, but also to bubble up where there are gaps so that
at the national level there is symbiotic planning between what
is happening at the national level, what is happening at state
levels.
I only want to caution that to say that we need to have
people at the table that are sharing that information across,
and I would also say one more thing, which is a plan is a
living document, and what we can't do is put all our time into
developing a plan.
We have to make sure part of that is making sure that we
are accountable for delivering on that plan, tracking that
plan, and making sure that we make adjustments along the way.
Senator Casey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chair. Thank you.
Senator Hassan.
Senator Hassan. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thanks
to you and the Ranking Member for holding this hearing. To all
of our witnesses, thank you very much for your excellent
testimony. Mrs. Hutchins, I wanted to start with a question for
you. I want to highlight the epidemic of loneliness in our
Country, which as we have been talking about, especially
impacts older Americans.
A recent study shows that more than one in three older
adults report feeling lonely or socially isolated. Loneliness
not only has negative impacts on mental health, but can also
lead to increased risk for dementia, heart disease, and stroke.
Mrs. Hutchins, you talked about your challenges with
loneliness, about your personal experience with it. What tools
and supports do you find most helpful in combating social
isolation?
Ms. Hutchins. I am thinking.

Ms. Hutchins. I have periods of loneliness, but I have
lived a long, very interesting life and I have many wonderful
memories that I fall back on when I get lonely. And I, of
course, talk on the phone to my family and my one friend who is
up in Syracuse. And I watch certain programs on TV, and I make
it through the day.
I am just grateful to have my son and my grandson stopping
in from time to time and it is--and my church. I just try the
best I can to make it through the day. But I have not been
depressed. So, I just, if I feel a little low, I will just
think of some wonderful thing that has happened to me in the
past and that gets me over it. But most of the time, I am in
good spirits.
Senator Hassan. Well, that is excellent. And I think one of
the things you are really describing is the importance of that
social interaction, even if it is just by phone or seeing
people and really having that connection is very important.
Ms. Hutchins. Oh, yes. I enjoyed the senior centers so
much. I went for 20 years to Lincolnia.
Senator Hassan. Yes.
Ms. Hutchins. Played bridge, art classes. I even
volunteered on the desk, and it was very rewarding. I was there
at least 3 days a week.
Senator Hassan. Well, thank you.
Ms. Hutchins. Their meals were very good, too.
Senator Hassan. Yes. Thank you very much for that. I want
to turn to Secretary Branham now. One way to address loneliness
is to create more opportunities for social connection across
different generations.
One senior community in Hanover, New Hampshire, called
Kendal at Hanover hosts a day care and early education program
for children up to 6 years old. This model, also called
intergenerational care, gives seniors the opportunity to
volunteer in the classroom and participate in social activities
with very young students.
For residents who enter the facility alone or who are
experiencing health issues and may be more prone to social
isolation, volunteering in the classroom and interacting with
the kids has become their favorite part of the day.
Intergenerational programs can obviously benefit both of
our seniors and our young people by giving them opportunities
to build new relationships and learn from each other. So,
Secretary, can you speak to how intergenerational care programs
like this can be useful in combating loneliness?
Ms. Branham. Yes. Thank you, Senator. I love our senior
volunteer program. First, here at the department, we have
seniors providing care for seniors. So, a lot of companionship
care and I absolutely love that volunteer program.
We have so many testimonies from across the state of that
because it is more than just, like I said, dropping off a meal.
It is taking time to read or bake cookies and spend time. But
on the intergenerational side, I think it is really exciting
because through the First Lady of Florida's initiative, we have
a mentoring program.
Seniors mentoring children at risk, children in the
elementary school system, and children graduating out of foster
care who need assistance. And I think that intergenerational
connection has been a win, win, both for the people, the young
people, the families surrounding them, and the seniors. So, it
has been really exciting to watch that.
Senator Hassan. Well, excellent. Thank you. And finally, to
Ms. Alwin, I want to focus a little bit on family caregivers
who obviously play such a central role in caring for loved
ones. Congress recognized the key role of family caregivers
when it added the Family Caregiver Support Program to the Older
Americans Act in 2000.
It is critical that we reauthorize and build on the
caregiver resources provided through the Older Americans Act to
ensure that families have the support that they need. That is
why I joined my colleagues in pushing for policies that support
caregivers, such as the Credit for Caring Act, which would give
much needed tax relief to family caregivers. What are the other
ways, Ms. Alwin, that Congress can support family caregivers?
Ms. Alwin. Fabulous. Well, thank you for your leadership in
introducing that important legislation, Senator. There are many
different actions Congress can place, and we are supporters of
the Raise Coalition and the incredible release of the National
Family Caregiver Strategy, where there are over 350 actions
that can be taken by Federal agencies already today to better
support family caregivers.
Many of the services and supports provided by the Older
Americans Act help those family caregivers. So, reauthorizing
the Older Americans Act, doubling the funding so those services
and supports, including respite care, are available to family
caregivers is critical.
Senator Hassan. Well, thank you very much, and I would add
my support for respite services. They are really, really
important. Thank you.
The Chair. Thank you, Senator Hassan.
Senator Cassidy.
Senator Cassidy. Thank you, Chairman Sanders. And thank you
all for being here. Really a great mission. Ms. Hutchins, you
kind of inspire us all to live that better life. Secretary
Branham, believe me, I just met with some fast food folks. They
are talking about the cost of labor.
We know that inflation has really bit--I am sure it has bit
your budget too. And yet, with all this growing population, you
are expanding services. Clearly, you are collaborating with
others. Can you speak about that collaboration? What are best
practices?
Ms. Branham. Something that we just--thank you, Senator,
for the question. It is something that we just did is our SCSEP
program out of OAA has been connected to career source.
Senator Cassidy. SCSEP program. Please, for everybody
watching who doesn't know acronyms?
Ms. Branham. Yes. It is the Senior Community Employment
Program. We love our acronyms. So that program has been really
paramount for us because it takes seniors back into the
workforce, educates and trains them, pays them while we are
doing it, and then really helps with the gaps in service that
we are seeing in Florida.
Now, we have added that SCSEP program, those seniors that
are in the program, into Career Source Florida, so that we can
really look at all the gaps across all of the industries in
Florida.
Senator Cassidy. If you will, you are not competing for the
person who might be doing lawn work out there, but rather you
are taking a group of folks who would have maybe more empathy
with the clientele, and you are giving them another chance at
employment.
Ms. Branham. Yes, sir. And usually, I see through our SCSEP
program, seniors helping seniors, and they traditionally go
into the social work environment, which I really enjoy
watching.
Senator Cassidy. Yes. I know this is a different Committee,
but do you run into problems with the retirement earnings test
in which they get a decrease in their Social Security payment
if they go back to work? Are you familiar with that?
Ms. Branham. No, sir. I am not.
Senator Cassidy. Dr. Kubik, I am a doc. I love the idea
that you are using--you are finding the win, win, win, if you
will. Elaborate a little bit on that, please.
Dr. Kubik. I definitely agree, it is a mutually beneficial
partnership. I think that we can do so much more to connect our
health profession students to our seniors and our aging
population. At this point, their exposure is mostly when that
person is in the emergency room or in the hospital, very
vulnerable, very frail.
Most of our seniors are not frail. Most of them are wanting
to stay at home, wanting to be successful, wanting to be
healthy, wanting to be productive, wanting to be able to go and
visit with their friends and socialize.
Senator Cassidy. Now, did I hear you correctly that you
have lowered systolic blood pressure to 20 points?
Dr. Kubik. Yes. Six point, almost. Yes. As you know, most
of the high blood pressure we get when we get older is the top
number. Our systolic blood pressure goes up.
Senator Cassidy. That is the top number.
Yes. That is a bottom number for people who----
Dr. Kubik. Right. So, we lowered that top number by almost
six points in the group that received the ageWELL program.
Senator Cassidy. Now, did you do that just by making sure
they were compliant, by looking at their diet, and making sure
they weren't eating Fritos for breakfast?
Dr. Kubik. No. The intervention, the work that we did with
the nursing students, it wasn't just one thing. It was a lot of
medication management. Every week they were there, they were
checking blood pressures.
We were writing blood pressures down. We were encouraging
them to take their lists to their health care provider. We were
getting up and walking with them. So, it wasn't just showing
them exercise, it was taking them and exercising with them. So,
in my opinion, it was all that coming together.
In our work, most of our seniors were taking three to five
medications or more every day. Whether they needed all those
medications or not is something that we need to look further
into, but it is a challenge to manage all these chronic
conditions that they have.
I think the feedback and the engagement that they were
having with the nursing students was an incentive to, perhaps
eat better, to be more active.
Senator Cassidy. By the way, and I forget again, it was you
or Ms. Hutchins, because I forget, but I think one of you said
something about making sure that you minimize the risk for
falls. I think about these throw rugs that are easy to slip
upon and somebody breaks their hip.
Dr. Kubik. Right. Exactly.
Senator Cassidy. Or fall and----
Dr. Kubik. That is right.
Senator Cassidy. Let the record show I slapped my head. And
so, if nothing else, you are creating that awareness among
those who are----
Dr. Kubik. Yes.
Senator Cassidy. A comment on that, please.
Dr. Kubik. Well, I think it is, again, that one on one
engagement between the senior and the nursing student allowed
the senior to prioritize concerns, but it also provided the
nursing student an opportunity to provide prompts.
Tell me about safety in your home. Tell me about how you
manage moving around your furniture and cooking and storing and
putting things away. Next week, when you come back, let's talk
about that some more. That is the other opportunity that the
nurses take----
Senator Cassidy. I am almost out of time, but I started off
speaking about a partnership with an outside agency that would
actually extend and leverage the dollars. And then you just
gave us another great example of how that is actually training
our next generation of nursing students. So, thank you both,
and thank you all.
The Chair. Senator Markey.
Senator Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My mother had
Alzheimer's. My father was a milkman. My mother was president
of the senior class. So, my father said, Eddie, it was an honor
that your mother married me. She is a brilliant woman.
She has Alzheimer's. There is something wrong. Shows you
that the strongest brains can be attacked. So, we are going to
keep her in the living room. That is going to be our job. She
is never going to go to a nursing home at age 80, 82, 84, 86,
88, 90. And here is a milkman. So, the right arm of a milkman
is like my upper thigh. He could do it. But it is hard. And so,
all he had was a visiting nurse 1 hour a day.
23 hours, we had her in the living room. Very difficult.
So, with Senator Wyden, I created a program called Independence
at Home to help people with chronic illnesses to have the
dignity of staying in their homes.
Ms. Branham, can you share how the Older Americans Act in-
home services and outreach programs for individuals with
Alzheimer's and others can provide for their families at home?
Ms. Branham. Thank you, Senator Markey, for the question
and touching my heart. I spent 10 years at the Alzheimer's
Association alongside people living with the disease and their
caregivers.
Some of the most courageous people I have ever witnessed.
Yes, I think living at home and being able to stay at home is
the best possible concept for someone living with dementia, but
it is really hard to do that by yourself. And I applaud your
father for doing that. So, having those wraparound services is
not something that just the OAA provides.
But here in Florida, the Alzheimer's Disease Initiative is
something that we fund. It has increased funding each year
for--to supplement OAA for services like that, because staying
at home and wrapping around care and services is not just for
the person living with the disease, but the caregiver too, is
really, really significant.
Senator Markey. Yes. And again two-thirds of Alzheimer's
patients are women. It is a one-third, two-thirds split.
Ms. Branham. Yes.
Senator Markey. There is a lot of work to be done to figure
out what is going on here because women are the caregivers. In
general, it is a reverse, and there aren't enough men to--that
can do that for all those women.
I led my colleagues in writing to the U.S. Department of
Agriculture and the Social Security Administration asking them
to make it easier for seniors and people with disabilities
applying for Social Security benefits to also get SNAP
benefits.
My goal is to make sure that because they didn't know they
could get help or got mixed up trying to fill out their
paperwork. Ms. Hollander, in your testimony, you mentioned that
over four in five low income food insecure are not receiving
the meals that they are eligible because of long waitlists.
Meanwhile, you noted that various funding streams with
different requirements and standards can make it very hard for
nutrition service providers to partner with others in the
community and tailor older Americans' meals to their specific
health needs.
Can you elaborate on that and what has to be done in order
to make sure that we make it easy for people to get access?
Ms. Hollander. Thank you for the question, Senator Markey.
Yes, I think we are talking about an older population that
generally 76 on average. Most of whom are women, as a matter of
fact.
I think some of the, for example, SNAP applications and so
forth is a little more complicated for them than it is for
others. But I, actually Senator Casey left, but I think he put
forward recently an act to help facilitate that process, the
Senior Hunger Prevention Act.
But I think just generally speaking, making sure that we
have people that are working with seniors, that are familiar
with all of the various benefits that might--they may be
eligible for is very important, and making sure they are
educated to do so.
Senator Markey. Thank you. Ms. Alwin, finally, how would
mechanisms within existing Older Americans Act programs to
support underserved populations like LGBTQ older adults help us
meet their unique health and social needs?
Ms. Alwin. Absolutely. So, to keep pace with the growing
number of older adults and the greater diversity among older
adults, we need to modernize and strengthen and fully fund the
Older Americans Act.
But those senior centers really are a front door to all
resources and services available for all older adults,
including LGBTQ+ older adults. And making sure we have the
right mechanisms in place to help support building the capacity
of those senior centers, sharing promising practices, providing
technical assistance, and designated funding so they can build
their relevance and capacity and culturally competent
programing is critical.
Senator Markey. Yes. And the Congress is the right place to
be, because the secret plan for every single Senator is to live
to be a very old person, Okay. So, we are completely into your
agenda to make sure that we help that population. Thank you so
much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chair. My understanding is that Senator Baldwin is on
her way. So, I am going to give her two more minutes and I will
take a minute and give a minute to Senator Cassidy just to ask
another question.
I think the average American would be stunned to learn that
millions of seniors are dealing with hunger issues or going
hungry, that we have actually malnutrition in America today. I
mean, that is rather an astounding reality. Ms. Hollander or
Ms. Alwin, do you want to say a word on hunger among seniors in
America?
Ms. Hollander. Well, it is a silent epidemic. That is part
of the challenge, that it is behind closed doors. And one of
the things we have to do is we have to amplify the fact that
this is a grave and growing issue, and we have the
infrastructure to do it.
One of the things I neglected to mention earlier when you
asked the question about funding, is that this is a successful
public, private partnership. For every Federal dollar that
comes in through the Older Americans Act, it is matched by
about $3 by private and state local sources.
Even though we are making investments, it is not carrying
the full freight of what we are asking. It is actually
attracting additional funding to do that.
The Chair. Thank you.
Senator Cassidy, want to take a minute?
Senator Cassidy. Yes. Ms. Hutchins, tell me, you are a
recipient. You have received meals both I gather going to some
place so called congregate and you have had meals delivered to
you. Would you have any suggestions to how to make either of
those programs a better program? You are on mute. Oh, go
ahead----

Senator Cassidy. Thank you ma'am. Thank you.
The Chair. Thank you very much. Okay, let me thank all of
our panelists. You did a great job. We look forward to working
with you on this enormously important issue. Thank you very
much.
We will now hear from our second panel. Okay. Our final
witness, and our witness for this panel, is Ms. Alison Barkoff,
the Acting Administrator and Assistant Secretary for Aging. Ms.
Barkoff leads the Administration for Community Living.
The Administration's mission is to maximize the
independence, well-being, and health of older adults, people
with disabilities across the lifespan, and their families and
caregivers. Thank you very much for being with us today, Acting
Administrator. You may proceed with your testimony.
STATEMENT OF ALISON BARKOFF, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY AD-
MINISTRATOR AND PERFORMING THE DUTIES OF THE AD-
MINISTRATOR AND ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR AGING, AD-
MINISTRATION FOR COMMUNITY LIVING, U.S. DEPARTMENT
OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, WASHINGTON, DC
Ms. Barkoff. Good afternoon, Chairman Sanders, Ranking
Member Cassidy, and Members of the Committee. Thank you for the
opportunity to provide testimony on the Older Americans Act and
for the Committee's long standing support of the Older
Americans Act programs and healthy aging.
I am Alison Barkoff, the Principal Deputy Administrator and
Senior Official, performing the duties of Administrator and
Assistant Secretary for Aging. I am pleased to share
information today about our work to strengthen OAA programs and
the aging services network that implements them, which
ultimately will help ensure our Nation's ability to meet the
needs of older adults.
OAA programs help older adults age in place, as the vast
majority want to do. They provide meals, family caregiver
support, preventative health services, personal care services,
transportation, senior centers, legal assistance, elder abuse
prevention, long term care ombudsman services, and so much
more.
These programs reach nearly one in four--five older adults
who tell us in survey after survey that OAA programs help them
stay in their own homes. These effective programs are an
incredible value.
With OAA dollars, the Aging Network leverages another $3 to
$4 from other sources to support OAA programs. For the next 20
years, 10,000 people, the population of a small town, will turn
65 every single day.
Helping people age in place and avoid more costly
institutional care will only become more important. For nearly
60 years, the structure of the OAA has driven its success. It
sets broad policy but gives the Aging Network the flexibility
to meet local needs. We saw the power of that during the
pandemic.
The network pivoted quickly and creatively, working with us
to use that OAA's flexibilities to continue services. They
created contactless service options, grab and go meals, and
more.
They increased coordination and forged new partnerships
with public health, emergency management, and others, while ACL
partnered with agencies across HHS to leverage our collective
resources to meet the unique needs of older adults. Working
through the pandemic highlighted the need to update the OAA
regulations to clarify its flexibilities and disaster
requirements.
Updating the rule also allowed us to provide guidance for
programs authorized since the last update, like the family
caregiver programs. We also aligned the regulations with
changes made to the law during reauthorization and addressed
questions that had arisen in the field about the statutory
updates.
We received input from states, tribes, Area Agencies on
Aging, and others. They sought greater clarity on requirements
but underscored the importance of preserving flexibility. The
final rule strikes that balance.
It reflects best practices from the field and provides the
updated modern framework needed to strengthen the network and
sustain the OAA's success. ACL is able to have an outsized
impact on issues critical to older adults through partnerships,
leveraging our programs and the Aging Network, and coordinating
across Federal Government to prevent duplication between
programs.
For example, we promote healthy aging with evidence based
programs, many developed by NIH and CDC, that have been proven
to improve overall health, prevent falls, and reduce health
care expenditures.
We have partnered across HHS and with the Aging Network and
nonprofits on our work to help older adults avoid social
isolation. We are collaborating to improve support to the
Nation's 53 million family caregivers, and we are working with
partners across Government to address the dire shortage of
direct care workers, which is jeopardizing community living for
older adults and putting more on family caregivers.
We are also partnering with HUD to improve coordination of
our programs to support community living and reduce older adult
homelessness. With the updated regulations and the partnerships
ACL and the aging services network are building across every
level of Government, OAA programs and the network are well
positioned to help older adults maintain their health and
independence, both today and into the future.
Thank you for the opportunity to participate in today's
hearing. ACL has appreciated the Committee's support of the
Older Americans Act and the Aging Services Network, and we look
forward to working with you in the future. I am happy to answer
your questions.

prepared statement of alison barkoff
Good afternoon, Chairman Sanders, Ranking Member Cassidy, and
Members of the Committee. Thank you for the opportunity to provide
testimony on the Older Americans Act (OAA) and for the Committee's
longstanding support of the OAA programs and interest in healthy aging.
I am pleased to share information today about the Administration for
Community Living's recent efforts to ensure our Nation's ability to
meet the needs of the growing population of older adults by
strengthening the OAA programs and the national aging services network
that implements them. These include the first comprehensive update to
the OAA regulations in more than 30 years and a number of partnerships
to address the issues most important to older Americans.
I am Alison Barkoff, the Principal Deputy Administrator and senior
official performing the delegable duties of the Assistant Secretary for
Aging and Administrator of the Administration for Community Living
(ACL) at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). ACL
was created around the fundamental principle that older adults and
people with disabilities of all ages should be able to live where they
choose, with the people they choose, and with the ability to
participate fully in their communities. ACL makes this principle a
reality for millions of older adults through implementation of the OAA,
working with and through the national aging services network of states,
tribes, area agencies on aging (AAAs), local service providers, and
volunteers who provide services that enhance the health, independence,
and dignity of our Country's older adults.
OAA Programs Are Critical to Meeting the Needs of America's Growing
Aging Population
The OAA programs provide a range of community-based services to
help older adults age in place, which is the preference of the vast
majority of older adults, and to maintain their health and engagement
in their communities. These services include home-delivered and
congregate meals, support for family caregivers, preventive health
services, personal and home care services, transportation, senior
centers, legal assistance, elder abuse prevention, and so much more. In
addition, the OAA provides ombudsman services for people who live in
long-term care facilities. The OAA programs reach nearly one in five
adults in the United States.
OAA services are effective in helping millions of older adults stay
in their own homes and communities instead of having to enter long-term
care facilities. For example, over 65 percent of caregivers who receive
OAA services like respite care and peer support report that without OAA
services, their high-risk care recipients likely would have had to
enter a nursing home or assisted living facility. Similarly, 82 percent
of people who participate in the congregate meals program and 92
percent of home-delivered meal recipients report that meals received
through the programs allowed them to continue to live independently.
Likewise, 66 percent of older adults using transportation services rely
on them for the majority of their trips to doctors' offices,
pharmacies, meal sites, and other critical daily activities that help
them to remain in the community. OAA services help prevent older adults
from having to spend down to become eligible for Medicaid to enter a
long-term care facility.
For nearly 60 years, the structure of the OAA programs has been a
hallmark of its success. The OAA and its implementing regulations
provide broad policy and guidance while allowing states, tribes, and
AAAs the flexibility to work together to design programs that are
responsive to local needs. In addition, the OAA programs are an
incredible value with a strong return on investment; with every OAA
dollar provided, the aging services network leverages another four
dollars from state, local, and private sources.
Despite the excellent return on investment and the broad reach of
the OAA programs, the demand for OAA services far exceeds capacity.
While anyone over the age of 60 is eligible to participate in the OAA
programs, not every older person needs the services and supports
equally. That is why the OAA requires services to be targeted to older
adults in the greatest economic and social need. This includes those
who are low income, as well as those whose needs are caused by
noneconomic factors, such as physical and mental disabilities, language
barriers, and cultural, social, or geographic isolation, such as
minority older individuals, older persons with limited English
proficiency, older persons residing in rural areas, older persons with
disabilities, and older individuals who are LGBTQ or living with HIV/
AIDS. For example, over 92 percent of OAA program participants have
multiple chronic conditions and are at risk for hospitalization; over
69 percent of case management clients take five or more medications;
and more than 40 percent of home-delivered meal clients need support
with three or more activities for daily living. In addition, five
million older individuals live below the Federal poverty level, many of
whom are served by the OAA programs.
The demand for--and importance of--the OAA programs continues to
grow as the population in the United States rapidly ages. Every 7
seconds today, and for the next 20 years, someone in America will join
the ranks of becoming an older adult; that is a rate of 10,000 a day,
or the equivalent of a small town in America. One in six people are
currently aged 65 or older, a 35 percent increase since 2010. By 2040,
that number will increase to one in five people. Helping people age in
place and avoid costly institutional care will only become more
important.
Lessons Learned from the Pandemic and Updated Regulations Have Well-
Positioned the Aging Services Network for the Future
Older adults were among the most impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic,
at highest risk for severe complications, illness, and even death. The
aging services network quickly pivoted with innovation and creativity,
working with ACL to find new ways to use the OAA's flexibilities to
serve older adults. For example, they modified programs to provide
contactless service, grab-and-go meals, and virtual wellness checks to
assess needs and combat social isolation.
Supplemental funding from Congress was also critical to their
success. Throughout the pandemic, the aging services network increased
coordination and forged new partnerships, including with public health
and emergency management entities, faith-based organizations, and other
community groups. At the Federal level, ACL partnered with sister HHS
agencies, including the Administration for Strategic Preparedness and
Response (ASPR), the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),
and the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), to bridge
gaps, pool resources, and leverage each of our networks to meet the
unique needs of older adults and address barriers to accessing
vaccines, treatment, and supports and services.
The pandemic underscored the need for ACL to update the OAA
regulations, which had last been updated in 1988. Rulemaking was an
opportunity not only to imbed lessons learned from the pandemic, such
as the importance of the flexibilities allowable under the OAA and of
inclusive disaster preparedness and response, but also to provide
guidance for programs that had been authorized after the last
regulations, such as the family caregiver programs. ACL also used the
rulemaking process to align the regulations with changes made during
reauthorizations of the OAA, including clarifying and answering
questions that had arisen in the field about statutory updates.
In updating the regulations, ACL sought the input of states,
tribes, AAAs, service providers, and older Americans themselves. ACL
held listening sessions and sought public comment through a formal
request for information in May 2022 and a notice of proposed rulemaking
in June 2023. During this process, ACL heard from commenters--including
state agencies and AAAs--seeking greater clarity from ACL on various
statutory requirements, including fiscal requirements. At the same
time, commenters also underscored the importance of flexibility to
address local community-level needs within the framework of the
statute.
The final rule strikes this balance, and sets forth an updated,
modern framework that reflects best practices from the field and
strengthens the aging services network. The regulations make clear that
state plans must describe how state agencies and AAAs will use OAA
funding, and how requirements for public participation are met. They
also require state agencies and AAAs to ensure coordination between
programs that serve all older adults, including tribal elders. Other
requirements clarify the state agency's responsibility to establish and
maintain policies and procedures to monitor the programmatic and fiscal
performance of programs and activities.
The regulations also detail how greatest economic need and greatest
social need are determined. Prioritizing people who have the greatest
economic and social needs has always been a basic tenet of the OAA; the
updated rule clarifies this requirement and sets expectations for
serving these older adults and ensuring that their perspectives are
incorporated into planning efforts by state agencies and AAAs.
Consistent with ACL's approach to rulemaking, this portion of the rule
also gives states flexibility to include additional populations based
upon local considerations.
The final rule addresses questions from the field about how the
aging services network can engage in business relationships to expand
their reach, such as partnering with health plans to deliver services
to older adults that address their health-related social needs. The
final rule sets forth the appropriate roles, responsibilities, and
oversight of such activities, and requires state agencies to establish
flexible and streamlined processes for AAAs to receive approval for
contracts and commercial relationships. The provision is intended to
promote and expand the ability of the aging network to engage in
business activities while ensuring that the unique roles of OAA
grantees are preserved. Relatedly, the regulations define ``conflicts
of interest'' and establish several requirements to prevent them. These
provisions are intended to ensure the integrity of--and trust in--the
activities carried out under the OAA, while preserving the ability of
the aging network to innovate and partner with other entities that
serve older adults.
The final rule also modernizes the OAA's senior nutrition programs.
These essential programs not only reduce hunger and food insecurity,
but they also improve health and address social isolation by providing
opportunities for older adults to engage with other people and to be
screened for other needs before they become crises. The COVID-19
pandemic both necessitated popular innovations across the programs and
brought to light limitations in the previous regulations. For example,
the new regulations clarify that home-delivered meals may be provided
via home delivery, pick-up, carry-out, or drive-through; eligibility
for home-delivered meals is not limited to people who are
``homebound''; and home-delivered meal participants may also
participate in congregate meals programs. The rule also clarifies that
the OAA allows for grab-and-go meals to be provided through the
congregate meals program in some circumstances. The regulation also
clarifies requirements for transfers of funds between the congregate
and home-delivered meals programs, as well as between the senior
nutrition programs and supportive services and senior centers. These
flexibilities allow states to tailor their programs to local needs and
older adults' preferences.
Just as the pandemic led to innovations in the senior nutrition
program, it also required the aging services network to think
creatively about other services, including senior centers. The pandemic
showed that for many older adults, especially those living in rural
areas, virtual senior center activities were welcomed and helped foster
important social connections. In the process of seeking input from the
field and stakeholders to inform the regulations, ACL heard from many
participants that they prefer senior centers be a part of larger
community centers, in part to encourage intergenerational
opportunities. Based on this, ACL has been testing approaches to
modernize senior centers, including transforming them into community
hubs, expanding programming to support overall wellness, and improving
their relevance to the current generation of older adults. The updated
regulations provide flexibilities that will allow senior centers to
evolve to continue to meet the needs and preferences of older adults.
The pandemic also highlighted that emergencies and disasters have
disproportionate impacts on older adults and family caregivers, and
often create unique challenges for the aging services network. However,
the previous OAA regulations included limited guidance addressing these
situations. The updated regulations create a new subpart regarding
supports for older adults and family caregivers, including those in
tribal communities, during emergencies and disasters. The new
regulations require state agencies and AAAs to establish emergency
plans and have policies and procedures in place for communicating and
coordinating with state, tribal, and local emergency management
entities within their jurisdictions. State agencies may set aside
funding to exercise flexibilities during a major disaster declaration
and procure items on a statewide level, subject to certain conditions.
To further be responsive to the need for flexibility, the rule makes
clear that the Assistant Secretary for Aging may modify emergency and
disaster-related provisions in the regulation when a major disaster or
public health emergency is declared.
The regulations also include important updates to OAA programs that
protect the rights of older adults and prevent and address abuse and
neglect. An estimated one in 10 adults over the age of 60 have
experienced some form of elder abuse, which can reduce their quality of
life and limit their independence. OAA programs play a critical role in
promoting elder justice, ensuring that older adults can live safely in
the community or in long-term care settings, and upholding older
adults' rights to participate in decisions about their lives. The
regulations outline how states must ensure the independence of long-
term care ombudsman programs that work to resolve problems related to
the health, safety, welfare, and rights of individuals who live in
nursing homes, assisted living facilities, and other residential care
communities. The updates also specify that efforts related to
guardianship must include assisting older adults with less restrictive,
more person-directed decisional supports whenever possible. Our elder
abuse work under the OAA is coordinated with ACL's programs under the
Elder Justice Act, including adult protective services (APS). We are in
the process of the first-ever rulemaking for APS, following the first-
ever annual appropriations for that program.
Finally, the updated OAA regulations provide guidance for the first
time on the OAA's family caregiver programs, which were added as part
of the OAA's 2000 reauthorization. The programs provide a range of
supports, including counseling, case management, and respite care, to
nearly 800,000 informal caregivers. Studies show that these services
enable caregivers to provide care longer, making it possible for older
adults to remain in their own homes and avoid or delay the need for
costly institutional care. The regulations provide key definitions,
implement statutory mandates, and clarify requirements for family
caregiver support services, allowable uses of funds, and the method of
funds distribution.
The final rule goes into effect on March 15, 2024, and the network
has until October 1, 2025, to implement its changes. Over the coming
months, ACL will continue to share resources and provide robust
technical assistance to support states, tribes and tribal
organizations, AAAs, and others in the aging services network in
meeting the requirements of the new regulations. ACL also will work
with states and other network partners in a supportive corrective
action process if more time is needed to fully comply with specific
provisions.
Through Partnerships, ACL and the Aging Services Network Are Helping
Address the Most Pressing Issues Facing Older Adults
ACL and the aging services network are able to have an outsized
impact on issues critical to older adults through partnerships,
leveraging our programs and network and coordinating across Federal
Government programs to ensure there is no duplication. For example,
healthy aging is an important issue, particularly as people are living
longer. ACL and the aging services network promote healthy aging by
implementing an array of evidence-based and evidence-informed health
promotion and disease prevention interventions--many developed by NIH
and CDC--that have been proven to improve overall health, better manage
chronic disease and illness, reduce falls and risks of injury, and
reduce healthcare expenditures. Falls prevention interventions are a
particular focus for ACL, given the significant financial, physical,
and social impacts falls can cause. Under the authority granted in the
most recent reauthorization of the OAA and with funding first provided
in fiscal year 2023, ACL is designing a research, demonstration, and
evaluation center to study an expanded set of effective falls
prevention approaches that can be implemented by the aging services
network. In addition, ACL is collaborating with more than a dozen
Federal agencies, including NIH and CDC, to create a strategic
framework for a national plan on aging through the Interagency
Coordinating Committee on Healthy Aging and Age-Friendly Communities
(ICC), an interagency working group created by Congress in the 2020
reauthorization of the OAA and that ACL recently launched after
receiving funding for the ICC for the first time in fiscal year 2023.
Social isolation is an epidemic that poses serious health risks to
millions of older adults. To increase the impact and reach of the OAA
programs that address social isolation, ACL has partnered with the HHS
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Health, the aging services
network, and non-profit organizations to establish Commit to Connect, a
cross-sector initiative to reach people who are socially isolated.
Commit to Connect has catalyzed a nationwide network of champions to
increase awareness and availability of programs and strategies that
address social isolation and loneliness and to strengthen partnerships
to leverage efforts, resources, innovations, and activities related to
social isolation.
ACL is also partnering across the Federal Government to address one
of the most pressing issues facing older adults--the direct care
workforce crisis and its impact on family caregivers. Because of
workforce shortages, many older adults who need services to remain in
the community cannot get them, and those who do receive services often
experience disruptions and inconsistent quality, both of which
jeopardize the health and safety of the people receiving services and
increase demands on family caregivers. ACL launched the Direct Care
Workforce Strategies Center (Strategies Center) in collaboration with
the Department of Labor, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
(CMS), and the HHS Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and
Evaluation. The Strategies Center provides technical assistance and
resources to strengthen collaboration across state agencies (including
aging, disability, Medicaid, and workforce development), direct care
professionals, people receiving services, and other stakeholders in
order to improve recruitment, retention, and development of this
critical workforce. ACL just announced several intensive technical
assistance opportunities available to states through the Strategies
Center, funded in part by the fiscal year 2023 OAA funding Congress
directed toward workforce issues.
Interagency partnership and collaboration with stakeholders also
are critical to ACL's efforts to support the more than 53 million
family caregivers in the United States, including grandparents raising
grandchildren. ACL facilitated the development of the first-ever
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers, submitted to Congress
in September 2022, which included more than 300 commitments from almost
15 Federal agencies and recommendations for state and local government,
business, and other stakeholders. ACL is leading the implementation and
update of the strategy. With OAA funding provided to ACL in fiscal year
2023, ACL recently awarded the first-ever Caregiver Projects of
National Significance to focus on implementation of recommendations in
the strategy by the aging services network.
Older adults are the fastest growing age group among those
experiencing homelessness, currently comprising nearly half of the
homeless population, and their numbers are estimated to triple by 2030.
To address this serious issue, ACL leads the Housing and Services
Resource Center (HSRC), a partnership between the Department of Housing
and Urban Development (HUD) and HHS, to coordinate across the
healthcare, aging, disability, housing, and homeless sectors the
affordable housing and community services that many older adults and
people with disabilities need to remain stably housed in the community.
The HSRC is funded in part through the OAA Aging Network Support
Activities, and the aging network is a key partner and beneficiary of
the HSRC activities. Jointly funded by ACL, HUD, and the Substance
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, the HSRC recently
launched a year-long intensive technical assistance initiative with
nine states focused on coordinating housing and services to address
homelessness, including among older adults.
Inclusive disaster preparedness and response is another priority
area where ACL and the aging services network are leveraging
partnerships to meet the unique needs of older adults during disasters.
Inability to evacuate, loss of services, inaccessible shelters, and
other issues can result in unnecessary institutionalization, poor
health outcomes, and even death for older adults during disasters.
Through ACL initiatives and supplemental funding during the pandemic,
the aging services network built partnerships with their state and
local public health and emergency management agencies to provide
expertise and fill gaps in addressing the needs of older adults. ACL
has partnered with other Federal agencies, including ASPR, CDC, HRSA,
and the Federal Emergency Management Agency, to build upon and
strengthen those partnerships. Recognizing the important role that
ACL's programs and the aging and disability networks can play in
disasters, HHS has established a Disaster Human Services Coordinating
Council, co-chaired by ACL, the Administration for Children and
Families, and ASPR, with participation of over a dozen HHS agencies,
and HHS's legislative proposals related to disaster preparedness and
response in the Fiscal Year 2024 President's Budget include a disaster
human services emergency fund that would allow the HHS Secretary to
provide real-time funding during disasters to vulnerable populations,
including people with disabilities, older adults, and children and
families.
Finally, ACL and the aging services network closely collaborate
with CMS and state Medicaid agencies and service providers on the
delivery of Medicaid-funded home and community-based services (HCBS).
Many in the aging network partner to expand the reach of the OAA
programs by also providing HCBS to low-income older adults, and as
discussed above, through commercial relationships with health plans,
many are able to help address health-related social needs like food
insecurity.
Conclusion
The OAA and its aging services network proves its worth every day
in the lives of older adults throughout the country. The importance of
the OAA programs and the demand for its services have never been
stronger and both continue to grow as the American population rapidly
ages. The OAA has a long history and strong record of providing cost-
effective services that successfully help older adults remain in their
own homes and communities and avoid unnecessary and costly care in
long-term care facilities. Key to the OAA's success has been the
flexibility it provides to states to design programs responsive to
local needs and the input received from older adults and the
organizations that serve them. ACL is pleased to have had the
opportunity to develop a comprehensive set of regulations that both
maintains these critical features and the longstanding processes for
effective stewardship of Federal resources and provides new
opportunities to modernize and strengthen the OAA programs. ACL is
excited to implement these regulations in partnership with the aging
services network to build on the decades of successful programming and
to position the aging services systems in the United States for
tomorrow's challenges.
Thank you for the opportunity to participate in today's hearing.
ACL has appreciated the Committee's support of the Older Americans Act
and the national aging services network in the past, and we look
forward to working with you in the future. I am happy to answer any
questions you may have.
______
The Chair. You ended right on the button. Congratulations.
Well, thank you very much for being with us, Ms. Barkoff, and
the work that you do.
We have heard testimony today that millions of seniors are
dealing with hunger issues in the United States of America,
that a lot of seniors are suffering from loneliness, that too
many seniors are falling, and that life expectancy is going
down for those and other reasons.
What would increase funding for the Older Americans Act
mean in terms of keeping seniors well nourished, keeping them
in better mental health?
What do you think it would mean in terms of actually saving
money in terms of cost of Medicare, Medicaid, nursing home
costs, etcetera?
Ms. Barkoff. Thank you, Senator Sanders.
The Chair. Try that mic. Is your mic on? Yes.
Ms. Barkoff. Thank you, Senator Sanders. And as you heard
from every single witness today, the OAA programs are
incredibly effective.
The statistics are regarding senior nutrition, for the
people we can serve, for the vast majority, we are their one
healthy meal in every single day. Our preventative health
programs help prevent people from entering emergency rooms.
Our programs focused on falls, whether it is the home
modifications or evidence based programs like Tai Chi help
prevent the incredibly challenging problems caused by falls,
both health problems and incredible expenses.
The programs work. What we don't have is the resources to
reach everyone. That is why in every single budget since this
Administration has been in place, we have asked for more
resources. We have to target our funding right now to reach
those in the greatest need, but we know there are so many more
people who could benefit from those services.
Additional funding would help our incredible networks reach
more people, and it would help us prevent--increased health
care costs from falls, from chronic illnesses, and help people
age in place instead of going into expensive nursing homes.
The Chair. Help me out here. But my understanding is that
the OAA does not directly provide funding to senior centers.
Senior centers utilize the funding, obviously, for
congregate meal programs, for the Meals on Wheels program, and
for other activities. In my state, I think we have, and I
suspect I speak for many other rural states, a real checkered
situation.
You have some senior centers that are really doing a great
job in terms of exercising, in terms of disease prevention,
really wonderful educational programs to engage seniors. Others
really are not.
Rural areas are having a hard time staffing. Maybe they
have a half time staffer inadequately paid. Do we need to take
a new approach to senior centers across the country?
Ms. Barkoff. Senator Sanders, senior centers are a critical
part of OAA services, and they have absolutely served our
Country's older adults well. They are part of Title 3(b) of the
Older Americans Act and included under the Supportive Services
and Senior Centers.
The statute does currently authorize acquisition,
alteration, construction, modernization, as well as funding to
the services provided there. We have seen and I have gone to a
number of senior centers, kind of the evolving senior centers.
They have gone from being a place to just going to get a meal
to, like you said, really community hubs.
They are often places that provide--we heard a question
from Senator Hassan about intergenerational programing. That is
incredibly important. When people are there, we always say it
is more than a meal.
We are able to evaluate people, connect them with
preventative health services, the exercise programs. We are
looking and we are working with our partners at NCOA, on
strategies for modernizing senior centers. It is a great
initiative. Thank you for the funding to be able to do that.
I think we are trying to figure out how to best meet the
needs of older adults in the future. People really want
different kinds of things. And so, what I would say is, I think
the infrastructure that we have in the Older Americans Act is
an incredible foundation, and we would look forward to working
with you on any changes that you think would help strengthen
senior center services.
The Chair. Thank you very much.
Senator Cassidy.
Senator Cassidy. Hey, thanks for being here. And thanks for
being here because I will note that the Department of Labor has
close to 20 percent of all OAA funding. I was going to ask them
about the Senior Community Service Employment Program, and they
declined to attend.
I am a little bit kind of befuddled how an agency over
which we have jurisdiction declines to come to have oversight
conducted. But that is not your issue. That is the DOL's issue.
And by the way, that--is inexcusable in my mind. So, let me
kind of get back comported, and find my question for you.
Your rule, give us some particulars as to what your rule is
doing, is advocating that is going to make the senior, Ms.
Hutchins' life better, or someone in Baton Rouge or Shreveport,
Louisiana. Give me a, like, boom, boom, boom, three things.
Ms. Barkoff. I think some of the things that were really
important that we put into this rule, one, I would say that we
never had any regulations related to the family caregiver
program.
We heard a lot today about the incredible support from Ms.
Hutchins too, about families, the need for respite, the need
for those programs. And it was a real privilege to be able to
do the first set of regulations there.
Senator Cassidy. What were those regulations? An example of
a new regulation.
Ms. Barkoff. The regulations provide the rules around how
to use the funding, how to leverage that. What is the
definition of a family caregiver. Who is eligible----
Senator Cassidy. How are you leveraging that?
Ms. Barkoff. How are we leveraging that? Well, we were----
Senator Cassidy. Or how would you suggest to leverage it,
if you will?
Ms. Barkoff. Sure. So, we have done a couple things with
the family caregiver program. First of all, we have been very
pleased to have additional funding from Congress over the last
couple of years to really expand the reach of those programs.
For example, I know one thing the Committee has cared a lot
about is grandparents who are raising grandchildren, and we
have been able to expand that reach, something that we have
seen really a growing population as part of that epidemic. We
have worked--sure----
Senator Cassidy. That is actually the abled grandparent
helping the child. So, how does this--but it is not the
incapacitated elderly or the semi--the less able. So, it seems
a little bit of a stretch of the original mission, if you
follow what I am saying. So, elaborate on that. What are you
doing for that grandparent caring for that grandchild?
Ms. Barkoff. Sure. So, the family caregiver program and the
statute itself defines who is a caregiver. We absolutely
provide supports to family members who are caring for, as you
said, an older adult who has disabilities and has needs.
The family caregiver program absolutely covers that. It
also covers an older adult who is taking care of another family
member. And again, we provide services----
Senator Cassidy. Now, let me ask because--I don't mean to
interrupt. I just got a few minutes. He is about to gavel me
down. So, you have limited dollars. It does seem like you run
the risk of the so-called woodworking effect, that the more you
cover, far more, the more you cover--if you follow what I am
saying.
If you extend the mission of--I am 66. I am kind of like
eligible for your services. But at the same time, if you extend
it, are you kind of detracting from the ability to care for
that person who is caring for somebody with Alzheimer's, in
which they truly need a respite program?
Ms. Barkoff. We prioritize, consistent with Congressional
intent, for all of our programs. Again, we don't have enough
resources----
Senator Cassidy. Now, you can't prioritize for all of your
programs. That is kind of oxymoronic.
Ms. Barkoff. Well, we do prioritize to those populations in
the greatest social and economic need. We work with states, and
they create a state plan where they look at how are they going
to distribute funding across states and different communities
using data, the census----
Senator Cassidy. Okay, but particular because you are
speaking--and I know you know your stuff, and so I am not
trying to challenge. But so much and the people watching on C-
Span, we got to drill down to something that they take away.
They know it.
Can you give me a particular of something post-pandemic
that we are now doing differently that would be recognized by
Ms. Hutchins or by her family--by her family caring for her?
Ms. Barkoff. Sure. Again, we, one of the new things that we
have in the Older Americans Act, and I think something that
maybe Miss Hutchins might experience is some of the work that
we are doing around inclusive disaster preparedness. It is
something that really people across----
Senator Cassidy. Increasing disaster preparedness in
Louisiana, I understand the need for that. So, drill a little
bit on that, please.
Ms. Barkoff. Sure, sure. We have, for the first time, put
in place requirements about how state units on aging and AAAs
can respond and help provide additional services when there are
disasters that happen, which we are seeing happening more and
more across----
Senator Cassidy. If somebody is evacuated to an area of
congregate living, a basketball stadium, for example, and they
are on a cot, how would their experience be different because
of what you are doing--knowing that there is many other people,
how would their experience be different?
Ms. Barkoff. Through the new regulations, the AAAs, we will
be able to, again, hopefully in advance be having more of a
plan to reach out.
They will be able to surge services through what is in the
older Americans Act with some reimbursement services there and
be able to really help identify who are people who need support
from the AAA, who might be able to get in-home meals, who might
need help with finding accessible housing.
That is another place where, again, we created an entirely
new title to address some of these flexibilities.
Senator Cassidy. Okay.
The Chair. Ms. Barkoff, thank you very much. And again, I
thank all of the panelists for helping us deal with an
enormously important issue, and I promise you, this Committee
is going to do its best to address the many problems that all
of you have raised.
That is the end of our hearing today, and I want to thank
all of our witnesses for their participation. For any Senators
who wish to ask additional questions, questions for the record
will be due in 10 business days, March 21st at 5.00 p.m.
Finally, I ask unanimous consent to enter into the record
eight statements from stakeholder groups outlining the
priorities for the re-authorization of the Older Americans Act.
Without objection.
[The following information can be found on page 60 in
Additional Material.]
The Chair. The Committee stands adjourned. Thank you.
ADDITIONAL MATERIAL
AARP,
March 7, 2024.
Hon. Bernie Sanders, Chair,
Hon. Bill Cassidy, M.D., Ranking Member,
Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions,
Washington, DC.
Dear Chairman Sanders and Ranking Member Cassidy:
AARP, which advocates for the more than 100 million Americans age
50 and older, thanks the Committee for holding this hearing, ``The
Older Americans Act: Supporting Efforts to Meet the Needs of Seniors.''
We appreciate the opportunity to work with you to advance support for
older adults and their family caregivers through the Older Americans
Act (OAA).
The OAA has a powerful legacy. Since 1965, it has supported older
Americans so they can live at home with independence and dignity,
deferring or eliminating more costly institutional services and
hospitalizations. According to AARP's 2021 Home and Community
Preferences Survey, the vast majority of adults age 50-plus--nearly 80
percent--want to remain in their communities and homes as they age. The
OAA plays a critical role in making sure people in this country can age
at home, where they want to be.
In a typical year, OAA programs provide services for approximately
11 million older adults. These include home care, congregate and home-
delivered meals, case management, family caregiver support,
transportation, adult day care, legal services, elder abuse prevention,
and job training and employment opportunities for low-income older
adults. Additionally, OAA Native American programs provide nutrition,
support and caregiver services to older American Indian, Alaska Natives
and Native Hawaiians. OAA programs are cost-effective investments that
serve the needs of older Americans while deferring or eliminating the
need for costly institutionalization.
Unfortunately, the need for these programs outweighs OAA's current
funding, which has not kept pace with inflation or increased demand.
While the number of people age 60 and older has grown by 74 percent
since 2001, OAA funding has lagged behind in that same time period,
rising only 41 percent. When adjusted for inflation, total OAA funding
over this time period has declined by 18 percent. Additionally, people
age 80 and older are among the most likely to need help to live
independently in their homes and communities, and this population is
projected to nearly double from 2023 to 2040.
Put another way, America is on the brink of a serious aging crisis.
Family caregivers are filling in the gaps, providing care to their
loved ones at significant expense to themselves in terms of both time
and money. As the population ages, the number of family caregivers is
not likely to keep up with the demand. Now more than ever, OAA is
essential for our Country.
As we approach OAA reauthorization, we look forward to continuing
to build on OAA's many successful programs, including the National
Family Caregiver Support Program (NFCSP) and Title VI Native American
Caregiver Support Services, the Senior Community Service Employment
Program (SCSEP), the Long-term Care Ombudsman Program (LTCOP), and the
Nutrition Services Program, which are outlined below.
National Family Caregiver Support Program (NFCSP) and Title VI Native
American Caregiver Support Services
NFCSP was created in 2000 to support a range of services that
assist family and other unpaid caregivers. Similarly, OAA's Title VI
Native American Caregiver Support Services provide support for American
Indian, Alaskan Native, and Native Hawaiian families, including through
information and outreach, access assistance, individual counseling,
support groups and training, respite care, and other supplemental
services. Protecting and increasing funding for NFCSP and Title VI
Caregiver Support Services will allow grantees the ability to fully
respond to local needs without having to shift resources from one
caregiver population to another.
More than 48 million family caregivers are the backbone of the U.S.
long-term care system, providing about $600 billion annually in unpaid
labor to their loved ones. The care they provide ranges from bathing
and dressing to paying bills and transportation, and their assistance
helps save taxpayers billions of dollars by helping to delay or prevent
expensive nursing home care and unnecessary hospital stays. However,
despite the many benefits family caregivers contribute to the economy
and the important role they play in preserving the health and well-
being of their loved ones, family caregivers often face significant
financial, physical, and emotional challenges. According to Caregiving
in the U.S. 2020, nearly 60 percent of family caregivers perform
medical and nursing tasks for their loved ones; too often, they have
little preparation or training. By supporting family caregivers, we can
help people stay at home, helping to delay or prevent more costly
nursing home care and unnecessary hospitalizations. As part of the
Act's reauthorization, we urge the Committee to help support our
Nation's family caregivers and meet their needs.
Senior Community Service Employment Program (SCSEP)
SCSEP is the only Federal program specifically created to assist
low-income workers 55 and older to regain entry into the workforce. The
program provides part-time community service assignments for low-income
persons age 55 or older who would otherwise have poor employment
prospects because older jobseekers continue to face barriers to
employment, often due to age discrimination. SCSEP-funded services are
available in nearly all 3,000 U.S. counties and territories.
Grantees include public workforce agencies and national nonprofit
organizations. Participants are unemployed, disadvantaged older workers
who work an average of 20 hours a week at minimum wage. Work experience
is gained typically in community service activities at nonprofit and
public facilities, serving as a bridge to unsubsidized employment
opportunities. SCSEP has helped thousands of older jobseekers into jobs
providing them work-based training and the opportunity to use their
skills. According to the recent Department of Labor Workforce GPS
survey, participants strongly believe that the program helped prepare
them for success in the workforce (8.4 on a 10-point scale). SCSEP adds
needed value as the only Federal program targeted at lower income older
jobseekers.
Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program (LTCOP)
LTCOP is the most effective program to advocate and act as a
resource for older adults and people with disabilities who live in
nursing homes, assisted living, and other licensed adult care homes.
Every state--plus Puerto Rico, Guam and the District of Columbia--has a
long-term care ombudsman office. These offices work to resolve problems
related to the health, safety, welfare, and rights of individuals who
live in long-term care facilities, and help residents understand and
exercise their rights to good care in an environment that promotes and
protects their dignity and quality of life.
Data from the 2022 National Ombudsman Reporting System (NORS),
shows that LTCOP's nearly 2000 full time staff and approximately 4000
certified volunteers investigated more than 182,000 complains
nationwide and provided assistance to more than 400,000 individuals
looking for information about long-term care. The COVID-19 pandemic
highlighted the critical role these ombudsmen play in the long-term
care system.
Nutrition Services Program
Congregate nutrition services and home-delivered nutrition services
provided by the OAA Nutrition Services Program reduce hunger and
support older adults' health and independence, including their ability
to remain in their homes. A 2017 evaluation found that 42 percent of
congregate meal participants and 61 percent of home-delivered meal
participants reported they would skip meals or eat less without the
program. OAA-funded senior nutrition programs also provide more than a
meal; they provide opportunities for social engagement, offer nutrition
screening and counseling, and link participants to other home-and
community-based supports. The majority of participants report that the
program helped them to eat healthier and continue to live
independently.
Congregate meals are offered in congregate or group settings,
giving older adults and sometimes their caregivers the opportunity to
socialize over food. Compared to nonparticipants, research shows lower-
income congregate meal participants have fewer nursing home admissions,
and those living alone have fewer hospital admissions. Other research
has found that low-income congregate meal participants are less likely
to be food insecure than nonparticipants.
Home-delivered meals serve many frail, homebound, or isolated older
adults. Research finds that home-delivered meals may improve
participants' nutritional status, with one study finding the program is
also associated with increased well-being, reduced loneliness, and
greater food security levels.
These OAA nutrition programs may also reduce social isolation,
which is a significant risk factor for poor health status and increased
mortality. A 2017 AARP Public Policy Institute study found social
isolation costs Medicare $6.7 billion per year. Congregate meals
participants report seeing friends more often due to the meals.
Relatedly, the home-delivered meal program is associated with reduced
loneliness among new participants, with delivery individuals often
being the only human contact of the day for homebound clients. The
reduced isolation can lead to improved health and reduced associated
health care costs among program participants.
Conclusion
AARP welcomes the opportunity to collaborate and buildupon the
success of these and other OAA programs through the 2024
reauthorization process. We look forward to working with the Committee
on a bipartisan basis as the process moves forward. If you have
additional questions, feel free to contact me or have your staff
contact Lauren Ryan on our Government Affairs team.
Sincerely,
Bill Sweeney,
Senior Vice President,
Government Affairs.
______
ADvancing States,
March 7, 2024.
Hon. Bernie Sanders, Chair,
Hon. Bill Cassidy, M.D., Ranking Member,
Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions,
Washington, DC.
Dear Chairman Sanders, Ranking Member Cassidy, and Senate HELP
Committee Members:
ADvancing States is a nonpartisan association of state government
agencies that represents the Nation's 56 state and territorial agencies
on aging and disabilities. We work to support visionary state
leadership, the advancement of state systems innovation, and the
development of national policies that support home and community-based
services for older adults and people with disabilities. Our members
administer services and supports for older adults and people with
disabilities, including overseeing Older Americans Act (OAA) programs
and services in every state.
We deeply appreciate the Committee's focus on the reauthorization
of the OAA and thank you for hosting this hearing as a forum for
discussion on the past, present, and promising future of the OAA. The
OAA is a pivotal piece of legislation that underscores the Nation's
commitment to the well-being of its aging population. We believe this
reauthorization presents an opportunity to incorporate lessons learned
and successful innovative strategies implemented during the COVID-19
public health emergency (PHE).
We are grateful to the Committee for inviting Michelle Branham,
Secretary of the Florida Department of Elder Affairs, to serve as a
witness at this hearing. State units on aging (SUAs) serve as the
linchpin for ensuring that the intent of the legislation translates
into tangible benefits for older adults and their caregivers within
their respective regions. SUAs play a crucial role in the development,
administration, and oversight of OAA programs and services, and their
perspective is crucial to informing the upcoming reauthorization.
As the Committee considers the upcoming reauthorization and
improvements to strengthen the OAA, we urge you to consider the
following:
Expand opportunities for state innovation: During the
COVID-19 PHE, the Administration for Community Living (ACL),
SUAs, area agencies on aging (AAAs) and service providers had
to shift quickly to implement necessary flexibilities and
innovative solutions to continue service delivery. States
continue to be interested in testing innovative strategies to
meet the needs of older Americans. To support ongoing
innovation, we recommend allowing SUAs to reserve 1 percent of
Title III funds to support piloting new programs and innovative
strategies.
Increase flexibility for the delivery of nutrition
services: Flexibility and innovation for nutrition services
were especially important during the COVID-19 PHE. During that
time, ACL authorized the transfer of nutrition funds to allow
the provision of ``grab & go'' meals (under Title III, part C-
1, congregate meals). The new OAA regulation makes this
flexibility permanent. In addition, as aging networks move
toward increased person-centered practices and individualized
community-based models of supports, the need for flexibility
with Title III C has increased. We recommend allowing states
full flexibility to determine the level of funding for home
delivered meals and congregate nutrition.
Establish a resource center within the Administration
for Community Living to support states: ACL currently houses
several resource and technical assistance centers, but none are
geared specifically toward SUAs. We recommend creating a
resource center for states, to offer technical assistance,
provide strategic planning support for new programs and
initiatives, and serve as a hub for peer-to-peer collaboration
and sharing of best practices.
Thank you for your focus on the reauthorization of the Older
Americans Act, as well as your consideration of ADvancing States'
recommendations for this vital piece of legislation. If you have any
questions about ADvancing States or our priorities for the OAA
reauthorization, please reach out to Rachel Neely.
Sincerely,
Martha Roherty,
Executive Director,
ADvancing States.
______
alzheimer's association and alzheimer's impact movement
The Alzheimer's Association and Alzheimer's Impact Movement (AIM)
appreciate the opportunity to submit this statement for the record for
the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions (HELP)
hearing entitled ``The Older Americans Act: Supporting Efforts to Meet
the Needs of Seniors.'' The Association and AIM thank the Committee for
its continued leadership on issues important to the millions of
individuals living with Alzheimer's and other dementias and their
caregivers. This statement highlights the importance of policies and
programs within the Older Americans Act (OAA) that can help meet the
unique needs of our Nation's growing number of Americans living with
Alzheimer's and other dementias.
Founded in 1980, the Alzheimer's Association is the world's leading
voluntary health organization in Alzheimer's care, support, and
research. Our mission is to eliminate Alzheimer's and other dementias
through the advancement of research, to provide and enhance care and
support for all affected, and to reduce the risk of dementia through
the promotion of brain health. AIM is the Association's advocacy
affiliate, working in a strategic partnership to make Alzheimer's a
national priority. Together, the Alzheimer's Association and AIM
advocate for policies to fight Alzheimer's disease, including increased
investment in research, improved care and support, and the development
of approaches to reduce the risk of developing dementia.
An estimated 6.7 million Americans age 65 and older lived with
Alzheimer's dementia in 2023. Total payments for all individuals with
Alzheimer's or other dementias are estimated at $345 billion (not
including unpaid caregiving) in 2023. Medicare and Medicaid were
expected to cover $222 billion or 64 percent of the total health care
and long-term care payments for people with Alzheimer's or other
dementias, which are projected to increase to more than $1.1 trillion
by 2050. These mounting costs threaten to bankrupt families,
businesses, and our health care system. Unfortunately, our work is only
growing more urgent.
As the prevalence of Alzheimer's disease and other dementias
increases, so does the need for care and support services for those
living with these diseases. The OAA provides Federal funding and the
necessary infrastructure to deliver vital support programs and social
services to our Nation's seniors, including those with Alzheimer's
disease. These critical programs are utilized by millions of low-income
Americans and provide for such services as home-delivered and
congregate nutrition services; in-home supportive services;
transportation; caregiver support; community service employment; health
and wellness programs; the long-term care ombudsman program; services
to prevent the abuse, neglect, and exploitation of older adults; and
other supportive services. Twenty-four percent of older individuals
with Alzheimer's disease and other dementias who have Medicare are also
eligible for Medicaid, punctuating the need within the Alzheimer's
community for such programs as Meals on Wheels and the National Family
Caregiver Support Program.
We are grateful that the Supporting Older Americans Act of 2020
(P.L. 116-131) included the Younger Onset Alzheimer's Disease Act,
championed by Senator Susan Collins (R-ME), to codify existing
authority to provide services to individuals living with younger-onset
Alzheimer's disease under the National Family Caregiver Support Program
and the Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program. The services provided under
the OAA are particularly helpful for individuals with younger-onset
Alzheimer's disease and related dementias who need assistance with
activities of daily living and accessing care.
Supporting Dementia Caregivers
Eighty-three percent of the help provided to older adults in the
United States comes from family members, friends, or other unpaid
caregivers. Nearly half of all caregivers who provide help to older
adults do so for someone living with Alzheimer's or another dementia.
And, for the over 11 million Americans caring for individuals with
Alzheimer's and other dementias, the emotional, physical, and financial
costs can be overwhelming. In 2022, caregivers of people living with
Alzheimer's or other dementias provided an estimated 18 billion hours
of unpaid care, a contribution valued at $339.5 billion. Of the total
lifetime cost of caring for someone with dementia, 70 percent is borne
by families--either through out-of-pocket health and long-term care
expenses or from the value of unpaid care.
Community services provided under the OAA offer invaluable support
for individuals living with dementia, and, due to the unique challenges
they face, it is paramount to continue prioritizing care coordination
efforts within communities during the reauthorization process. Dementia
often requires a multi-disciplinary approach involving medical
professionals, caregivers, social workers, and community support
services. Effective coordination helps caregivers navigate the complex
healthcare and social service systems and ensures that caregivers and
health care professionals collaborate seamlessly, providing
comprehensive care tailored to their individual needs. Challenges such
as cognitive decline, communication difficulties, and fluctuating
symptoms necessitate specialized strategies for coordination.
Initiatives promoting dementia-friendly communities and caregiver
education programs play crucial roles in enhancing coordination and
support networks. By prioritizing and refining care coordination,
communities can offer a better quality of life and support for
individuals living with dementia and their caregivers.
When developing legislation to reauthorize OAA, we ask that the
Committee consider provisions to emphasize the unique and growing
support services needed by Alzheimer's and dementia caregivers. We are
grateful for the Committee's longstanding work to enhance access to the
National Family Caregiver Support Program, and the swift implementation
of the country's first National Family Caregiver Strategy as created by
the Family Caregiving Advisory Council established by the Recognize,
Assist, Include, Support, and Engage (RAISE) Family Caregivers Act.
These dedicated caregivers greatly benefit from increased resources,
training, and support to help them navigate the strain of caregiving
and improve their health and quality of life.
Strengthening the Dementia Care Workforce
We ask that the Committee consider policies to reduce barriers and
ensure individuals living with dementia have adequate access to long-
term care and home-and community-based services (HCBS). People living
with Alzheimer's and other dementias make up a significant portion of
all long-term care residents, comprising 49 percent of all residents in
nursing homes and 34 percent of all residents in assisted living
communities and other residential care facilities. Given our
constituents' intensive use of these services, the quality of this care
is of the utmost importance. As a result, we encourage the Committee to
consider policies to enhance long-term care and support services for
the growing number of Americans with Alzheimer's and other dementias
who are eligible to receive OAA services.
A strong dementia care workforce is needed to ensure quality care
for aging populations. For example, individuals living with dementia
make up a large proportion of all elderly people who receive home-and
community-based services, and 31 percent of individuals using adult day
services have dementia. Access to these services can help people with
dementia live in their homes longer and improve the quality of life for
both themselves and their caregivers. In-home care services, such as
personal care services, companion services, or skilled care, can allow
individuals living with dementia to stay in familiar environments and
be of considerable assistance to caregivers. Adult day services can
provide social engagement and assistance with daily activities. When
drafting language to reauthorize the OAA, we urge the Committee to
consider the unique needs of individuals with Alzheimer's and other
dementias directly benefit from a well-trained workforce specialized in
dementia care.
Conclusion
The Alzheimer's Association and AIM appreciate the Committee's
steadfast support and commitment to advancing issues important to the
millions of individuals living with Alzheimer's and other dementias, as
well as their caregivers. We look forward to working with you as the
Older Americans Act reauthorization effort moves through the
legislative process and again ask that you keep individuals living with
dementia in mind as you develop this bill.
______
diverse elders coalition
Chairman Sanders, Ranking Member Cassidy, and Members of the
Committee:
On behalf of Diverse Elders Coalition (DEC), I appreciate the
opportunity to submit a statement for the record regarding ``The Older
Americans Act: Supporting Efforts to Meet the Needs of Seniors,'' and
thank you for convening this important hearing.
Founded in 2010, the DEC advocates for policies and programs that
improve aging in our communities as racially and ethnically diverse
people; American Indians and Alaska Natives; and lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender, and queer/questioning (LGBTQ+) people. Our
member organizations--National Asian Pacific Center on Aging (NAPCA),
National Caucus and Center on Black Aging, Inc. (NCBA), National
Hispanic Council on Aging (NHCOA), National Indian Council on Aging
(NICOA), SAGE (Advocacy and Services for LGBTQ+ Elders), and Southeast
Asia Resource Action Center (SEARAC)--are experts in the distinctive
needs of the racial, ethnic, political, and cultural communities they
represent. Through their actions in their respective communities, they
are viewed as trusted members who provide services and resources for
diverse caregivers and their aging loved ones. Together, we are
uniquely positioned to effectively reach our communities in rural
areas, cities, and regions throughout the United States.
Six Decades of Supporting Older Americans, but Funding Not Keeping
Pace
Older people across the United States aged 60 years and above rely
on critical programs and services funded by the Older Americans Act
(OAA)--originally passed by Congress in 1965--to help them live safely
in their homes and communities as they age. Between 2010 and 2020, the
number of Americans age 60 and older increased by 33 percent from 57.5
million to 76.5 million. In just a few short years, it is projected
that one in five people in the U.S. will be age 65 or older by 2030. By
2034, older adults will outnumber children for the first time in U.S.
history. Increasing our investment in cost-effective OAA programs and
services is a critical step in responding to the needs of our aging
America.
The vital OAA dollars administered to states and communities every
year provide a wide range of services that prevent unnecessary nursing
home placement, promote healthy aging, and help people age with
independence and dignity where they want to be, in their homes and
communities. The OAA helps millions of older adults each year by
providing in-home supportive services; family caregiver supports
offered through OAA assist those who help older individuals. On that
note, we encourage the Committee to ensure the OAA aligns with the
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers as enacted through the
Recognize, Assist, Include, Support, & Engage (RAISE) Family Caregivers
Act.
Unfortunately, OAA funding is lagging far behind senior population
growth, as well as economic inflation. Meanwhile, 10,000 people turn 65
every day. We urge Congress to incrementally increase annual
authorization levels over the 5-year reauthorization period to account
for the rise in the older population, the greater need for services,
and the impact of inflation on the cost of delivering these services.
A Growing and Diversifying Older Adult Population
Not only is the U.S. older adult population growing rapidly, but it
is also becoming increasingly diverse. According to the most recent
U.S. Census, the share of Americans 65 or older rose by more than a
third from 2010 to 2020, the fastest increase in 130 years. Over the
next two decades, the White (non-Hispanic) older population is expected
to increase by 26 percent, while older racial and ethnic minority
populations are expected to grow by 105 percent, including:
Hispanic by 148 percent;
African American (not Hispanic) by 73 percent;
American Indian and Alaska Native (not Hispanic) by
58 percent; and
Asian American (not Hispanic) by 93 percent.
Over one-third of adults ages 65 and older have some form of
disability, and many need assistance with daily activities such as
bathing, eating, toileting, housework, medication management, financial
management, and grocery shopping. In fact, nearly half of Americans
ages 75 and older and a quarter of those ages 65 to 74 report having a
disability, according to estimates from the Census Bureau's 2021
American Community Survey (ACS). With respect to adults from racial and
ethnic groups, the numbers with disabilities are:
3 in 10 American Indians/Alaska Natives;
1 in 4 Blacks;
1 in 5 Whites;
1 in 6 Native Hawaiians/Pacific Islanders;
1 in 6 Hispanics; and
1 in 10 Asians.
An estimated 3-5 million LGBTQ+ people have disabilities, and
finding affordable, accessible, and inclusive health-care services is
more challenging for them. This is particularly true for those living
in rural areas, where LGBTQ+ elders are more likely to have
disabilities and be at a higher risk for isolation and discrimination,
due to a lack of LGBTQ+ inclusive and fully accessible service
providers in their communities. Furthermore, LGBTQ+ people with
disabilities often report difficulties in having their identities fully
recognized. For example, in spaces focused on disability, their unique
experiences as LGBTQ+ people may not be accounted for--underscoring the
need for intersectional approaches.
Compounding Effect of COVID-19 Pandemic on Diverse Older Adults and
Their Caregivers
The COVID-19 pandemic's implications for social isolation,
depression, complex risks and health issues for older adults
underscored the importance of the DEC's research on diverse family
caregivers (in partnership with the National Alliance for Caregiving).
Anxiety (58 percent) and increased isolation (56 percent) were the top
two selections by caregivers across all DEC-hosted webinars when asked
about challenges they faced during the pandemic. Across all webinars,
56 percent of polled caregivers selected ``taking care of myself'' as
their top concern. Additionally, 43 percent of diverse caregivers who
were surveyed desired more emotional support, further emphasizing the
mental health strain and social isolation brought on during the
pandemic. By comparing the DEC's data from surveys, focus groups, and
key informant interviews, we observed that the COVID-19 pandemic only
exacerbated pre-pandemic mental health strain on diverse caregivers.
Along with mental health, participants also selected financial
strain (35 percent average) as a top challenge during the pandemic.
Unfortunately, financial challenges that have arisen during the
pandemic will only worsen family caregivers' pre-existing financial
burdens. In our research, on average, 4 out of 10 diverse family
caregivers paid expenses for their loved ones' care.
We encourage continuous direct engagement with diverse family
caregivers to ensure services and supports are meeting all communities
in a way that is in line with personal and family preferences. It is
without doubt that this much needed dialog with diverse communities
must address a lack of culturally responsive resources to support
caregivers' mental health, social isolation, and financial strain,
without losing sight of the strengths inherent in the ways in which our
communities exercise resilience. We must have the research, data
collection, and reporting on all populations to avoid further
marginalization, to enhance meaningfully multicultural patient and
family engagement, and to be culturally responsive in a way that
proactively supports caregivers of older adults, including racially and
ethnically diverse family caregivers; American Indian and Alaska Native
family caregivers; and LGBTQ+ family caregivers.
To that end, we encourage the Committee to consider continuing
certain flexibilities in reauthorization and amending the OAA to
sustain pandemic-era innovations that strengthened supports to our
communities by making access to services more equitable.
DEC Policy Priorities
We at Diverse Elders Coalition recently released our Policy
Priorities, which are intended to serve as a guidepost for Federal
policymakers in recognizing and addressing the distinct, priority needs
of diverse older adults and their caregivers when designing effective,
equitable policy solutions for the communities represented by the DEC.
As such, we strongly encourage Members of the Committee to consider
these critical areas as they undertake the OAA reauthorization process
and examine ways to strengthen OAA programs to better serve our
communities.
1. Ensure Equitable Access to the Spectrum of Services and Lifelong
Needs for Diverse Older Adults
a. Ensure all federally funded programs include person-
centered, trauma-informed, culturally appropriate and
accessible services to reduce disparities in aging services and
supports for diverse older adults. When considering
accessibility, programs should take into account the conditions
where people live, or social influencers of health--including
but not limited to housing, transportation, income, education,
pollution, discrimination, lack of family or community support,
and violence--that contribute to wide range of disparities and
inequities impacting people's health, well-being, and quality
of life.
b. Improve language access by making it easier for older adults
with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) to navigate and receive
quality language assistance; collecting and better utilizing
language data to provide personalized language services across
Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid; and translating
applications, notices, and resources into additional languages
and improving access to in-language materials.
c. Close the digital divide for diverse older adults by
bolstering programs that offer expanded eligibility and low-
cost access to broadband services; ensuring digital inclusion
through best practices on how to reach these communities;
providing skills training to promote digital literacy;
increasing uptake and utilization of services among those who
already have access to broadband; and increasing the supply of
affordable broadband.
d. Strengthen anti-discrimination protections in all federally
funded programs--around race, ethnicity, Tribal affiliation,
language, disability, age, sex, sexual orientation, gender
identity, sex characteristics, and immigration status--and
allow for intersectional analysis. Emerging research has
revealed that historical discrimination and racism contribute
to increased aging and cognitive decline.
2. Provide Adequate Resources to Enable Diverse Older Adults to Age
in a Place of their Choice, within Age-Friendly Communities
a. Establish Federal standards for measuring and ensuring
equitable access to Home and Community Based Services (HCBS) in
Medicaid. Medicaid HCBS has turned into a patchwork of programs
with wide variation among and within states. This has led to
inequities in access and services needed to live in the
community, that often leave institutional settings as the only
available option for receiving care.
b. Invest in long-term, linguistically robust and culturally
appropriate care to enable diverse older adults to self-
determine how to age--in place; in congregate care; or as
determined by their loved ones. Place special emphasis on
Tribal lands, rural areas, and other hard-to-reach communities.
3. Address the Needs of Diverse Caregivers for Older Adults
a. Ensure that the eligibility criteria for programs and
services designed for caregivers offer an inclusive definition
of ``family'' to include siblings, aunts, uncles, cousins,
nieces, nephews, grandparents, grandchildren, domestic
partners, youth, members of the same tribe, friends, and/or
community members that are not related by blood, but whose
close association with the care recipient is the equivalent of
a family relationship.
b. Expand access to programs, services, and resources for
diverse caregivers, including low-income and LEP individuals,
those with disabilities, and people in rural areas. Respite
care, for example, is particularly important for caregivers for
people with dementia. Likewise, recognize that a lack of
technological literacy in rural, urban, and suburban areas
alike may present a challenge for caregivers accessing formal
supports.
c. Provide comprehensive, universal paid family and medical
leave to family caregivers that includes a broad and inclusive
definition of ``family.''
4. Expand Data Collection, Disaggregation, and Reporting both among
and within Diverse Populations
a. Create and promote a Federal demographic data collection
standardization requirement, modeled after DEC Members' and
expert partners' best practices. Apply these standards to
establish demographic data collection, analysis, and reporting
to better understand how all programs along the continuum of
care are serving individuals, particularly those who are most
marginalized, including LEP older adults.
b. Disaggregate available data in order to collect more
detailed information on population subgroups. The absence of
specific subgroups for race, ethnicity, LGBTQ+ status, and
disability has meant that many diverse older adults have fallen
through the cracks. Disaggregated and intersectional data
collection and reporting are crucial to identify community
needs and target programs effectively and efficiently.
Oversampling should also be given strong consideration in all
government surveys to help identify the needs of smaller sub-
ethnic groups.
c. Provide strong consumer protections by safeguarding the data
that has been collected to ensure that it cannot be used for
discriminatory, profiling-related actions such as immigration
or law enforcement, redlining or targeting of specific groups.
Implement strict Federal standards around maintaining collected
data safely and securely.
Conclusion
The Older Americans Act can--and should--ensure that the aging
network has the tools it needs to better meet the needs of all older
people, including individuals of every sex, sexual orientation, gender
identity, race, religion, national origin, disability, and ethnic
background. We look forward to working with Members of this Committee
and other lawmakers to build upon the long history of bipartisan
support for OAA-funded programs that serve older adults and their
caregivers, particularly in hard-to-reach and underserved communities
across the United States.
On behalf of the Diverse Elders Coalition, thank you again for the
opportunity to submit a statement for the record. Should you have any
questions, please contact DEC Director of Policy and Advocacy Didier
Trinh.
______
elder justice coalition
The Elder Justice Coalition commends Chairman Sanders and Ranking
Member Cassidy for convening this first hearing for the Reauthorization
of the Older Americans Act. Next year we will celebrate the 60th
anniversary of this remarkable program and the 33rd anniversary of
Title VII, which houses the Act's elder justice activities.
We are a nonpartisan coalition of 3,000 individuals and
organizations dedicated to ending elder abuse, neglect and exploitation
via Federal policy. In a reauthorized OAA, funding all of Title VII,
especially tribal elder justice programs, is necessary to build and
maintain the capacity to respond to abuse reports, and we call on the
Committee to better recognize the reality of abuse, neglect, and
exploitation of older adults and people with disabilities and provide
adequate funding levels to address them. We have received multiple
stories of older adults who could benefit from a fully funded program.
One woman in Michigan whose daughter created an unnecessary
guardianship to take money and jewelry. Or an elderly veteran in North
Carolina taking care of her sick spouse taking out a $90k loan for her
neighbor's credit debt, only to be financially exploited.
Our coalition has always recognized that APS agencies have a
pivotal role as the primary line of defense for elder abuse victims,
offering crucial assistance, support, and help in prevention. We
believe that robust support and funding for APS agencies is integral to
effectively meet the needs of elder abuse victims and their cases.
Across the country, states have communicated current struggles with
inadequate funding and staffing within their APS programs. Higher
authorization levels can start to address these issues to ensure the
effective implementation of APS initiatives.
Funding and support for the National Adult Protective Services
Technical Assistance Resource Center (APS-TARC) and the National Long-
Term Care Ombudsman Resource Center (NORC) should continue in the next
reauthorization, as they are crucial to providing support, technical
assistance, and training to state Long-Term Care Ombudsman Programs and
Adult Protective Services.
As we have commented in past reauthorizations, we believe Title VII
activities should be integrated further into Title III nutrition
programs and call for elder abuse training for all who work in OAA
programs. This is already taking place in states where nutrition
providers are mandatory reporters, but all older adults could benefit
from increased recognition and reporting of elder abuse.
We appreciate that the recently issued final OAA regulations
established of expectations for legal service providers to help in
elder abuse prevention and clarified that the aging network has a role
to defend against the imposition of guardianship and in promoting
alternatives. We appreciate that the first-ever APS Regulations will
soon be released.
Sincerely,
Bob Blancato,
National Coordinator Elder Justice Coalition.
______
the national association of nutrition and aging services (nanasp)
The National Association of Nutrition and Aging Services (NANASP)
commends Chairman Sanders and Ranking Member Cassidy for convening this
first hearing for the Reauthorization of the Older Americans Act. Next
year we will celebrate the 60th anniversary of this remarkable program.
This is the time in its 59th year to renew, reinvigorate, and modernize
its programs and services for the future.
Our 1100+ members provide nutrition services to over 4 million
older adults a year in both congregate and home delivered settings. In
a reauthorized OAA, it is vital that both Titles III-C1 and C2 maintain
their identity. This could be accomplished through a straight
consolidation of funding, perhaps better achieved through a parity of
funding, or by providing a higher transfer authority between C1 and C2.
As with past reauthorizations, we would like transfers between Title
III-C and III-B to give priority to nutrition-related services.
Authorization levels need to better reflect the realities on the
ground including some aftermath issues from the pandemic. While the
pandemic required an almost full shift to home delivered meals, prior
to the pandemic, two thirds of older adults in the program were served
in congregate settings. There is a strong desire among nutrition
providers to get more congregate programs back into communities because
these programs provide more than just a meal. Congregate sites offer
important nutrition education and invaluable socialization
opportunities. Congregate nutrition programs and senior centers both
in-person and virtual are real solutions to the increased isolation and
loneliness among older adults. We are supportive of separate and
dedicated funding for both socialization programs and the senior
centers which provide them.
We appreciate that the recently issued final OAA regulations
continued many of the successful pandemic-era flexibilities for senior
nutrition programs. We believe others could be included such as
allowing carryout, groceries, or less frequent deliveries.
We believe it's important to ensure OAA funded meals are of high
nutritional value to promote healthy aging while ensuring continued
participation. We believe the current language that meals must meet
both 1/3 Dietary Reference Intakes and will comply with the most recent
Dietary Guidelines for Americans (DGA) should be updated to follow only
the DGA as they focus on older adult nutrition needs.
We also support all efforts at the state and area level to
incorporate malnutrition prevention programs. We would like to include
malnutrition screenings in Title III-D health screenings and
malnutrition in nutrition education provided in Title III.
In brief, some other early principles we would like to advance and
provide greater depth in the future:
We call on data collection to specifically define and
include both waiting list and unmet need to ensure better
allocation of resources
We support greater recognition and support for
medically tailored meals and culturally appropriate meals, the
latter being important to helping to achieve better targeting
in the nutrition program
We would also like to explore the inclusion of
language allowing Title III reimbursement of assistive
technology which has been enhancing service older adults in the
OAA since the last reauthorization
Sincerely,
Bob Blancato,
Executive Director NANASP.
______
philadelphia corporation for aging
Dear Esteemed U.S. Senate HELP Committee Members:
Good morning, my name is Najja Orr, and I am the President and CEO
of Philadelphia Corporation for Aging, also known as PCA. PCA wants to
thank Chairman Sanders, Ranking Member Cassidy and the Members of the
Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions for the
opportunity to provide input on the critical reauthorization of the
Older Americans Act. PCA also wants to commend Senator Casey,
Pennsylvania's senior Senator, and Chair of the Special Committee on
Aging for his leadership on the Older Americans Act and issues facing
older Pennsylvanians.
First and foremost, PCA wants to express its strong support for the
reauthorization of the Older Americans Act to continue the essential
work provided to older adults through the Aging Network. Area Agencies
on Aging (AAAs) as authorized through the Older Americans Act serve a
critical function in communities across the Nation. AAAs play an
essential role in promoting the health, independence, and well-being of
older adults, as well as supporting their caregivers and advocating for
policies that benefit the aging population.
Philadelphia Corporation for Aging (PCA) is a 501c3 non-profit
organization which has served for the past 50 years as the designated
AAA for Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. PCA is the largest AAA in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and advocates on behalf of more than
316,000 older Philadelphians. Older Philadelphians are diverse with 44
percent identifying as white, 56 percent identifying as minority and 16
percent identifying as foreign born. Nearly 20 percent of
Philadelphia's total population is over 60 and 28 percent of them are
75 or older. Older Philadelphians, like the overall population of the
city, generally have a lower income with 30 percent below 150 percent
of the Federal poverty level and more than 20 percent below 100 percent
of the Federal poverty level. Philadelphia has consistently been among
the cities with the highest proportion of impoverished older adults of
the 10 largest cities in the United States.
As the state-designated AAA for Philadelphia County, PCA is
responsible for coordinating and administering Federal, state, and
local funds for older Philadelphians and adults with disabilities. The
agency provides more than 30 services, including advocacy, care
management for long-term care programs, protective services, home-
delivered meals, and the administration of senior centers. PCA has
coordinated a broad range of services for more than 140,000 older
Philadelphians annually to fulfill our mission to improve the quality
of life for older Philadelphians and people with disabilities, and to
assist them in achieving their maximum level of health, independence,
and productivity.
In fiscal year 2024, PCA projects to provide more than 1.27 million
home-delivered meals and more than 315,000 congregate meals; serve more
than 15,000 community members at senior community centers; provide
approximately 325,000 personal care service encounters, approximately
1,100 home support visits, and approximately 1,700 adult day care
sessions; subsidize more than 100,000 trips through our Shared Ride
Program; and respond to more than 9,100 reports of need for suspected
elder abuse.
Pennsylvania's State Unit on Aging is currently developing a Master
Plan on Aging called ``Aging Our Way, PA,'' with the support of the
AAAs and other stakeholders throughout the Commonwealth. As a part of
this process PCA coordinated 17 listening sessions in 14 different zip
codes in Philadelphia. Six of the listening sessions had interpreters
present to conduct the session in Spanish, Mandarin, or Korean. The
agency also offered sessions for the LGBTQ+ elder community and
professionals in the aging field. Many of the comments expressed were
repeated across the city including the importance of safety in the
community, affordable accessible housing, and reliable transportation.
Older Philadelphians also underscored the need to feel respected by the
community and health care providers, have access to interpretation
services, and the desire for employment and volunteer opportunities.
It is important to note that the underlying core issue of ongoing,
deep poverty is the driving force behind many of the concerns heard
throughout the listening sessions and is seen daily in our work across
the city. In reauthorizing the Older Americans Act PCA urges the
Committee to ensure the continuing focus on addressing systemic poverty
among older adults. This will alleviate the pressure on health systems,
home and community-based services, and food insecurity as well as
confront the realities of safe housing, and secure communities.
It is critical that the Older Americans Act continue to provide
clarity regarding which factors may be used by states to demonstrate
``greatest economic need,'' and ``greatest social need,'' especially
for use in intra-state funding formulas. PCA believes states should
have a formalized process that provides transparency in the evaluation
and selection of all measures beyond income and should include an
explicit requirement that AAAs be included in this process.
Given the enormous body of research on the linkage of racial and
ethnic status to disparities in health and social well-being, there
should be an explicit separate requirement that racial or ethnic status
be a factor in this definition as outlined in the Older Americans Act.
Evidence of this can be seen in Philadelphia where, according to
Philadelphia's Department of Public Health, 2023 Health of the City
Report, African Americans experience worse health outcomes, have lower
life expectancy, and are dying at higher rates than other racial and
ethnic groups in Philadelphia. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Philadelphia Department of Public Health (2023). Health of the
City Report. Retrieved from https://
philadelphiapublichealth.shinyapps.io/health-of-the-city.
Additionally, as the Committee considers the reauthorization and
funding of services that benefit older adults, PCA urges you to address
the alarming nationwide trend of at least 1 in 10 older adults
experience some form of elder abuse, neglect, or exploitation,
according to the National Center of Elder Abuse Report, Prevalence of
Elder Mistreatment. \2\ In Philadelphia, protective services reports of
need have grown from approximately 5,000 in fiscal year 2016 to over
9,000 during fiscal year 2023. The challenge faced in funding
protective services and other PCA services is in many ways compounded
by two other major factors. First, many of PCA's core functions have
been level funded for the past decade. Second, PCA, like all other
human services and health agencies, is grappling with the dramatic
changes in the labor market including the shortage of key personnel.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ National Center of Elder Abuse (2024). Prevalence of Elder
Mistreatment. Retrieved from https://ncea.acl.gov/
prevalenceofeldermistreatment#gsc.
PCA would like to take this opportunity to echo many of the
recommendations provided by USAging in their Policy Brief,
Recommendations for the Reauthorization of the Older Americans Act \3\
including:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ USAging (2024). Policy Brief: Recommendations for the
Reauthorization of the Older Americans Act. Retrieved from https://
www.usaging.org//Files/USAging-OAAReauth-Recommendations-Final-
Version.pdf.
``Recommendation 1.1: Significantly increase authorized funding
levels to meet the real and urgent needs of a rapidly growing older
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
population and the rising costs of service delivery.''
As the older adult population continues to grow and needs increase
in complexity, coupled with the rising costs of service, it is
important that funding levels continue to meet the real needs of those
AAAs are entrusted to serve and to protect the most vulnerable in our
community including those at risk for elder abuse.
``Recommendation 1.3: Allow Title III D health and wellness
programs to be evidence-informed--not just evidence-based--to expand
the Aging Network's ability to reach older adults with emerging
interventions and to extend the reach especially in rural areas and
other areas which have limited funding for this important work.''
PCA believes it is critical to call attention to the strict
definition of evidence-based programs. There is no doubt that it is
necessary to utilize programs that apply best practices and are
validated, however the high bar of evidence-based can inhibit
innovation and ability to utilize programs that address the unique
needs of diverse communities. The Aging Network should be provided with
the flexibility to use evidence-informed programming which will allow
more opportunities to develop affordable and innovative programming.
``Recommendation 2.1: Unify and modernize the Title III C nutrition
funding streams and programs to reflect recent innovations, the
changing needs of consumers and the goal of local decision-making
inherent in the Act.''
Lessons learned from COVID-19 taught us of the importance of being
flexible, adaptive, and innovative in our practices. Due to flexibility
in funding allowed as a result of the pandemic, AAAs across the country
devised incredibly innovative and unique models to ensure nutrition
services were provided to their constituents. Allowing continued
flexibility of funding will ensure local providers can meet the needs
of their communities including person-centered approaches and cultural
considerations in meal provision.
``Recommendation 3.1: Increase the administrative funding ceiling
by 2 percentage points to ensure appropriate program development,
oversight and network management amid rising costs and eroding Federal
OAA funding.''
Administrative funding is essential for AAAs to be able to explore
opportunities for innovations, to bridge the gap between state and
Federal funding and the increasing cost of labor, goods, and services,
as well as to conduct strategic planning and research to ensure that
growing communities in need are being reached.
Finally, PCA would also like to echo the Older Americans Act
Modernization Priorities from The National Council on Aging to protect
and strengthen the Senior Community Service Employment Program (SCSEP)
and update eligibility requirements. \4\ As mentioned previously, PCA
heard from older Philadelphians a desire to find employment
opportunities, and given the poverty faced by older adults in
Philadelphia and across the Nation, there is a need for a strong
support system.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ National Council of Aging (2024). NCOA Older Americans Act
Reauthorization Priorities. Retrieved from https://www.ncoa.org/
article/ncoa-older-americans-act-reauthorization-priorities.
Thank you for providing this opportunity to share my perspective
about the important services enabled by the Older Americans Act and for
your dedication to supporting older adults. The reauthorization and
strengthening of the Older Americans Act will ensure that older adults
will continue to have the opportunity to age in their communities of
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
choice with dignity.
Sincerely,
Najja R. Orr, MBA, DBA,
President and CEO.
______
usaging
Introduction
Thank you to the Senate HELP Committee for the opportunity to
provide written testimony regarding the reauthorization of the Older
Americans Act (OAA). I write to you from the vantage point of my two
roles. One as the Chief Executive Officer of Senior Resources of West
Michigan, an Area Agency on Aging, and the other as President of
USAging, the national association representing Area Agencies on Aging
and advocating for the Title VI Native American Aging Programs. Senior
Resources provides services to three diverse counties on Michigan's
west coast. We serve a rural county, one of the healthiest counties in
the state and another county that is one of the unhealthiest counties
in the state. However, one of the Act's guiding principles--local
flexibility--supports our AAA's ability to identify, plan for and meet
the needs of a diverse aging population in our service area.
In fiscal year 2023 the services we provided or funded through
local community partners served nearly 13,000 participants. In keeping
with the Act's charge to leverage funding to meet the needs of older
adults and caregivers, our services are supported by Federal OAA
dollars, state Older Michiganians Act funds and a county senior
millage. We primarily utilize OAA funds to help older adults,
especially those in greatest economic and social need, remain in their
preferred home setting and community through the provision of home and
community-based services, which include information and referral/
assistance, care coordination, in-home services, nutrition,
transportation, legal services, evidence-based health and wellness
programs, caregiver support services and more.
The demand for these services significantly exceeds available
funding and with the increased costs for direct care workers, food,
transportation and business operations, our agency is currently unable
to serve as many older adults and caregivers as we have in prior years.
This is despite the fact that the aging population is growing in
Michigan and nationwide due to dramatic demographic growth of those
older than age 65, including the fastest-growing population in the
country, which are those age 85 and older. This is why a significant
increase in authorized OAA funding levels, followed by actual increased
Federal appropriations, is sorely needed.
In addition, and separate from our OAA programs and services, our
AAA is a 1915c Medicaid Waiver provider for approximately 1,300
participants; this is frequently true of other AAAs around the country.
One of our most innovative recent programs is our Primary Care at Home
service which is designed to address the medical needs of patients who
have difficulty leaving their homes for medical appointments. We also
offer Behavioral Health at Home services, participate in the VA Home
and Community Based Services program and are currently developing an
Institutionally Equivalent Special Needs Plan with two other AAAs to
provide another long-term care option for older adults in the
communities we serve. Our program development and innovation is rooted
in the intent of the OAA and everything we do is with an eye to our
mission to ensure that older adults can age with optimal health,
independence and dignity and how we can better reach and serve older
adults to achieve that goal.
That is why in addition to increased authorization levels and
appropriations for the OAA, my agency and our national association,
USAging, are calling for changes to the OAA that currently impede the
development of outside-of-OAA revenue sources so that AAAs can serve
more older adults and better meet their missions. We must have clarity,
transparency and flexibility so that the OAA's mission and assets are
protected and prioritized, yet AAAs and providers in the Aging Network
must be able to engage with health care entities to bridge the gaps
between acute care and social care, to address the social drivers of
health, support the healthy aging of older adults and ensure there are
more home and community-based services available in every community in
the Nation.
The health care system is shifting its focus to health equity and
health-related social needs (HRSNs), and this has been reinforced and
encouraged by the Biden administration in their recent efforts. These
HRSNs are often, if not always, addressed by social care organizations,
such as AAAs, and health care organizations are increasingly relying on
AAAs to provide these services. It is important to ensure that there
are no barriers in place to prevent AAAs from providing HRSN services
to individuals, especially older adults, so that they can receive the
social care they need to maintain their overall health and well-being.
OAA authorization will expire at the end of fiscal year 2024 and
today, the vision and mission of OAA is even more important than it was
nearly six decades ago, as our Nation faces an unprecedented
demographic shift. Enabling aging in place should be a bipartisan
national priority. Fostering a society in which aging at home and in
the community is not only the collective desire but also the national
expectation requires us to recognize, protect and bolster the
foundation upon which this goal was built. The OAA is that foundation,
and as Federal policymakers consider the Act's reauthorization, USAging
urges Congress and the Administration to work toward policy decisions
that honor the longstanding intent of the OAA while seeking legislative
updates that enable continued innovation, flexibility and greater
capacity to meet the needs of this Nation's rapidly growing aging
population and their caregivers.
The following USAging recommendations reflect members' five decades
of experience, innovative work and commitment to the needs of today's
older adults and caregivers.
USAging 2024 OAA Reauthorization Recommendations
(Details available at www.usaging.org/OAA).
Goal 1: Serve More Older Adults Who Need to Age Well at Home
Recommendation 1.1: Significantly increase authorized funding
levels to meet the real and urgent needs of a rapidly growing older
population and the rising costs of service delivery. USAging's over-
arching top priority for the 2024 reauthorization is that Congress
significantly increase authorization levels for all titles of the Act.
These are woefully underfunded programs and services that are needed by
older adults, caregivers and families, now more than ever. A strong
statement by reauthorizers to appropriators as to the value of these
cost-effective services and the importance of investing in OAA to avoid
higher health and long-term care costs is essential in this
reauthorization.
Recommendation 1.2: Ensure that AAAs and other Aging Network
community-based organizations are able to further meet their missions
by securing health care or other private funding to serve more older
adults. Nearly all AAAs' mission-driven programs and services go beyond
just their duties under the OAA. Despite a growing older adult
population, Federal OAA funding has eroded, forcing AAAs to seek other
funding streams and relationships to supplement their OAA funding to
better meet their missions. We urge Congress to clarify and rectify the
conflicting and ambiguous language in multiple sections of the Act to
ensure that when OAA funds are leveraged for health care contracts or
establish private-pay programs, State Units on Aging have a clear, non-
burdensome and appropriate oversight process for the AAAs' activities.
Recommendation 1.3: Allow Title III D health and wellness programs
to be evidence-informed_not just evidence-based_to expand the Aging
Network's ability to reach older adults with emerging interventions and
to extend the reach especially in rural areas and other areas which
have limited funding for this important work. The higher cost of
evidence-based programs--due to ensuring fidelity to the proven
method--makes it extremely difficult for AAAs with either a small
allocation or a widely dispersed service population to stand up a
successful program that reaches older adults who could greatly benefit
from these interventions. Strict fidelity also creates barriers to
offering culturally relevant programming at times--as the model cannot
be adapted to best reflect local needs and remain evidence-based.
Therefore, we are requesting that Congress restore flexibility in III
D, allowing AAAs to provide evidence-informed, or similar, programming
as well as evidence-based models.
Recommendation 1.4: Expand Title VI, Grants for Native American
Aging Programs, to include a dedicated Supportive Services funding
stream and boost the capacity of grantees through more robust training
and technical assistance. Congress should expand Title VI, Grants for
Native Americans, to allow and authorize funding for a wider range of
supportive services than is feasible with current funding and capacity,
such as transportation and health and wellness programs. While Title VI
Parts A and B allow grantees to offer supportive services similar to
those authorized under Title III of the Act, the funding is primarily
spent on nutrition services first, with little funding remaining for
additional wraparound services such as transportation, in-home care,
legal assistance and other supports that are so desperately needed.
Goal 2: Meet the Needs of Today's and Tomorrow's Older Adults
Recommendation 2.1: Unify and modernize the Title III C nutrition
funding streams and programs to reflect recent innovations, the
changing needs of consumers and the goal of local decision-making
inherent in the Act. While maintaining the integrity and goals of the
C1 congregate meals program and the C2 home-delivered meals program,
it's time to create one funding stream and one nutrition program, with
approved activities that reflect the history, present and future of
nutrition service delivery. USAging believes that there should be a
unified III C Nutrition Services, with several authorized program
options under it.
Recommendation 2.2: Reduce social isolation and loneliness among
older adults by authorizing a national resource center dedicated to
providing training and technical assistance for Aging Network
professionals on innovative strategies to build and expand social
engagement programs and activities. Currently this work is dependent on
ACL's decision to fund it from its discretionary pool of dollars. And
as their attention has turned to more consumer-focused social isolation
campaigns to broader audiences beyond older adults, professional
resources stand to be lost. Adding authorization for a national center
focused on the Aging Network professionals who deliver social
engagement opportunities is not only needed but complements the 2020
statute additions and ensures that the Act addresses emerging needs
through proven delivery systems.
Goal 3: Maintain Efficient Oversight and Management of Local Service
Delivery to Ensure Quality
Recommendation 3.1: Increase the administrative funding ceiling by
2 percentage points to ensure appropriate program development,
oversight and network management amid rising costs and eroding Federal
OAA funding. The Act's current limit of 10 percent for administration
of the Area Plan (Sec. 304 (d)(1)(A)) is no longer feasible due to many
years of eroded funding and increased costs of doing business, such as
but not limited to personnel, liability insurance, information
technology, data collection and reporting requirements. To ensure the
highest quality programming and services, AAAs must be able to maintain
an adequate workforce, conduct quality assurance and oversight of
providers, and successfully perform their planning and program
development duties.
Authorized and actual funding levels have not increased over the
past two decades to meet the rapidly growing size of the age 60+
population and their caregivers who need these services, nor the rising
costs of labor, food, supplies and infrastructure. Therefore, the
current 10 percent administrative percentage is insufficient. Given
eroded funding and cost growth, it is necessary to increase the amount
AAAs are able to draw from to efficiently and effectively plan, develop
and administer this wide array of critical OAA programs and services.
USAging recommends Congress increase the maximum administrative
percentage to at least 12 percent in the 2024 reauthorization. This is
well in line with standard administrative rates for other nonprofit
organizations.
Conclusion
USAging has alerted policymakers for decades about this current
demographic shift and the need to plan, prepare and create options in
the community that help older adults stay healthy and independent--and
out of institutions. The time now has come for Congress to recognize
the value of the OAA as the critical non-Medicaid HCBS resource that
meets these goals and invest accordingly. We urge Congress to preserve
the essential infrastructure of the OAA and expand its capacity to
serve the growing number of Americans who will need the vital services
it provides. Thank you for the opportunity to share our OAA
reauthorization recommendations and how they would help the Act better
meet the needs of older adults and caregivers across the country,
especially those who most need assistance.
______

