FEEDING A HEALTHIER AMERICA:
CURRENT EFFORTS AND POTENTIAL
OPPORTUNITIES FOR FOOD IS MEDICINE
----------
Tuesday, May 21, 2024
U.S. Senate,
Subcommittee on Primary Health and Retirement Security,
Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:32 p.m., in
room 430, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Ed Markey,
presiding.
Present: Senators Markey , Murphy, Smith,
Hickenlooper, Marshall, and Braun.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR MARKEY
Senator Markey. The Senate Health, Education, Labor, and
Pensions Subcommittee on Primary Health and Retirement Security
will come to order. Thank you all for joining us today for the
hearing, Feeding a Healthier America: Current Efforts and
Potential Opportunities for Food is Medicine. Thank you,
Ranking Member Marshall, for partnering to bring together this
very distinguished hearing.
In 1941, President Franklin Delano Roosevelt convened his
first White House conference on nutrition. At that conference,
he stated that the food an individual eats fundamentally
affects his strength, stamina, nervous condition, morale, and
mental functioning. And today we would say the benefits flow to
all in our society.
Food security played an essential role in the reforms of
the New Deal and the Great Society. As we moved towards a more
equitable and just society, access to food was and is
essential.
In 1946, Congress passed the National School Lunch Act to
safeguard the health and well-being of our Nation's children.
In 1964, Congress created food stamps now called SNAP, or the
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program to support improved
levels of nutrition for low-income households. And in 1965,
Congress passed the Older Americans Act, which would later
include and support nutrition programs for seniors. Food
programs were core to the New Deal and Great Society because
basic food security as a source of nutrition, health, and basic
necessity is a key component of building a more just society.
And at each point in history, it is the fight for a healthier,
more just society that played an integral role in improving
access to nutritious healthy foods.
In the late 1960's in Mound Bayou, Dr. Jack Geiger wrote
prescriptions for malnourished children to get food from Black
owned grocery stores in Mississippi and were paid for by the
clinic's pharmacy. When the Federal Government pushed back on
this, he said, ``The last time I checked my medical textbook,
the specific therapy for malnutrition was, in fact, food.''
Civil Rights leaders demanded an end to hunger as part of
the Poor People's March on Washington in 1968. And in the late
1980's and early 1990's, in response to the HIV AIDS epidemic,
programs like Community Servings represented here today and
others, developed Food is Medicine programs to make sure that
people living and dying from HIV AIDS receive care and support
even when many were disowned by their own families.
As David Waters said, ``Community Servings showed up for
them and said, you're not alone, we're here for you and we've
made this beautiful meal for you.''
Food is Medicine, an outgrowth of this movement for greater
food security and healthier communities is a basic concept. It
is the concept that the food that we eat impacts our overall
health and well-being. And today, we see Food is Medicine in
medically tailored meal programs that address an individual's
medical diagnosis, symptoms, allergies or medications.
Produce Prescription Programs are allowing people to get
financial support, to buy produce, to treat a health condition
or risk. These programs are being integrated across hospitals
and community health centers. Lowell Health Center in
Massachusetts partners with Mill City Groves to ensure patients
with chronic conditions can access healthy, locally sourced
produce.
East Boston Health Center is serving groceries to hundreds
of families each week, providing prepared meals for seniors
through their home delivery meal program, and providing onsite
Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women Infants and
Children support.
We've heard time and time again that an ounce of prevention
is worth a pound of cure. And a pilot conducted by Blue Cross
Blue Shield in North Carolina, food delivery and health
coaching for low-income members with type 2 diabetes was
associated with $139 per month less in medical costs per month.
A recent Tufts study found that if medically tailored meals
were implemented for everyone with diet related diseases and
for people with limitations on activities of daily living, we
could save $13 billion in the first year alone.
By comparison, Ozempic costs about a thousand dollars a
month. Medicare spending for Ozempic, Rybelsus, and Mounjaro,
reached $5.7 billion in 2022, up from $57 million in 2018. To
fully deliver on the cost savings promised by Food is Medicine,
we need to feed programs by funding research and supporting
community organizations like our local health centers and
nonprofits who are running and developing these programs.
We need to make sure that there is no separation between
our food systems and our health systems. Health providers must
know they can prescribe Food is Medicine, that their patients
can access easily and affordably.
But Food as Medicine is more than just cost savings. Food
is Medicine is a stop in the continuum of food justice to
guarantee that from the farms to dinner tables, people can get
the food they need to sustain themselves in their communities.
What our planet can produce is as essential to our health
as what our health systems can provide. With Food is Medicine,
we can nourish a healthier America.
Thank you all, all of our witnesses. And now, I will turn
to recognize Ranking Member of the Primary Health Subcommittee,
Senator Marshall.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR MARSHALL
Senator Marshall. Well, thank you, Chairman Markey, for
convening this hearing on Food Is Health. A special welcome to
our panel and we have rescheduled this once. So thanks for
turning your schedules again around to come back and help us
out to understand this issue out a little bit more. I want to
say a special thanks to the majority staff for all your help
putting this together as well.
But I'm often asked, most days I get asked what can we do
to drive the cost of healthcare down? What can we do to save
Medicare? What can we do to impact maternal morbidity? What can
we do to impact the diabetes epidemic that we're seeing, ADHD,
cancer incidents, all those, what can we do to impact all of
those? And I would make the case that sound nutrition is not
just part of the answer. It is the answer to those dilemmas.
Food isn't just medicine, food is health. And I look forward to
the testimonies today.
I think the challenge before us is how do we turn these
ideas, these concepts, the research you've all done, how do we
turn it into practical programs, the policy from the Federal
Government, but also how can we put wind beneath your wings as
you all try to solve this problem at the local level? So
welcome everybody and we look forward to your testimony.
Senator Markey. Thank you, Senator Marshall, very much. And
now we're going to turn to our witnesses. Our first witness is
Ms. Jean Terranova. Thank you for being here today. Ms.
Terranova is the Senior Director of Policy and research at
Community Servings in Boston, an organization which provides
medically tailored meals to individuals and families facing
chronic illness of food insecurity.
She currently serves as a principal investigator for two
NIH studies examining the impact of Community Servings, meals
on health outcomes and quality of life for individuals with
diabetes and food insecurity. She also serves on the policy
committee of the Food is Medicine Coalition and as a board
member for the Aspen Institute's Food is Medicine initiative.
Ms. Terranova, thank you so much for being here. Whenever
you feel comfortable, please begin.
STATEMENT OF JEAN TERRANOVA, SENIOR DIRECTOR OF POLICY AND
RESEARCH, COMMUNITY SERVINGS, BOSTON, MA
Ms. Terranova. Thank you so much. Chairman Markey, Ranking
Member Marshall, and Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for
the opportunity to testify in this hearing.
My name is Jean Terranova, I am the Senior Director of
Policy and Research for Community Servings. Our organization
was founded in Boston in 1990 by a diverse coalition of
activists, faith groups, and community organizations, to
provide home-delivered meals to individuals living with HIV/
AIDS at the height of the crisis. We were founded based on the
simple principle, although perhaps revolutionary at the time,
that food is medicine and that we can drastically improve
health simply by changing an individual's diet.
In the last 34 years, Community Servings has grown from a
neighborhood to a regional program serving medically tailored
meals, MTMs to thousands of people across Massachusetts and our
neighboring states. We have grown to serve diverse populations
experiencing critical illnesses like diabetes, cancer, and many
others.
Over our history, we have delivered over 13 million meals,
including over 1.1 million last year. And with our nationwide
partners in the Food is Medicine Coalition, we have learned
that nutrition plays a crucial role in the healthcare space.
I want to thank the Subcommittee for shining a light on
this important issue. Since the 2022 White House Conference on
Hunger, Nutrition, and Health, healthcare stakeholders have
been paying closer attention to nutrition, and specifically how
nutrition can be better integrated into health care delivery.
We have great experience with this in Massachusetts. Since
2020, our Medicaid program has provided reimbursement for
nutrition services through an innovative model funded under an
1115 waiver.
Community Servings now maintains contracts with 12 of the
17 Accountable Care Organizations participating in this
program. We have been able to achieve this integration because
our programs have been rigorously studied, including in a peer-
reviewed 2019 study published in JAMA, which I have submitted
with my written testimony. That study found, among other
benefits, that MTMs helped achieve a 16 percent net savings on
total health care spending due to decreased emergency room
visits, hospital admissions, and emergency transportation
services. And the net savings factors in the cost of the meals.
The Aspen Institute has just released its updated Food is
Medicine Action Plan showing that there are many other studies
demonstrating that MTMs can significantly reduce healthcare
utilization and costs.
Medically tailored meals are a simple concept but are
complicated to implement. At Community Servings, our
nutritionists evaluate each client individually for their
health and dietary needs, their community access to food, and
their ability to provide for themselves.
The client is then assigned one or a combination of
Community Servings' 16 meal plans to meet their food
preferences and dietary requirements. We provide a week's worth
of meals at a time, often for both the client and their family.
In addition to the meals, the weekly delivery includes
snacks of fresh fruit and yogurt, and a quart of milk. We also
provide nutritional education and counseling to those we serve,
so that they have the tools to continue on a healthy path once
they've moved on. The results are powerful.
Chuck, a 66-year-old with diabetes and vascular issues, has
lost over fifty pounds and avoided a foot amputation since
receiving a Cardiac Diabetic diet from Community Servings.
Janet, a 60-year-old with an autoimmune disease and cancer,
credits Community Servings with taking an intimidating burden
off her plate by providing her with nutritious foods, allowing
her to focus entirely on her other health needs.
Our impact goes beyond the patients we serve; Food is
Medicine Programs also benefit local food supply chains. Our
local foods program intentionally sources as much food we can
from local providers, totaling over 50,000 pounds of local
fish, fruit, and vegetables every year. We have made great
strides in increasing access to integrated food with medicine,
but more can still be done.
Congress should increase research funding through the
National Institutes of Health to explore the benefits of MTMs,
and should seek other avenues to integrate nutritional
interventions into programs like Medicare. We thank Chairman
Markey and Ranking Member Marshall for their brand-new trio of
bills that would task Federal agencies with publishing
nutrition best practices, and to increase access to MTMs
through community health centers.
We strongly support the bipartisan, bicameral, MTM pilot
bill led by Senator Booker and Ranking Member Marshall. We need
to be increasing such connections between the health care
system and the food system.
Again, I thank the Subcommittee for the opportunity to
testify today and welcome any questions you may have.

prepared statement of jean terranova
Chairman Markey, Ranking Member Marshall, and Members of the
Subcommittee: Thank you for the opportunity to testify in this hearing.
My name is Jean Terranova, I am the Senior Director of Policy and
Research for Community Servings. Our organization was founded in Boston
in 1990 by a diverse coalition of activists, faith groups, and
community organizations to provide home-delivered meals to individuals
living with HIV/AIDS at the height of the crisis. We were founded based
on the simple principle, although perhaps revolutionary at the time,
that food is medicine and that we can drastically improve health simply
by changing an individual's diet. In the last 34 years, Community
Servings has grown from a neighborhood to a regional program serving
medically tailored meals (MTMs) to thousands of people across
Massachusetts and our neighboring states. We have grown to serve
diverse populations suffering from critical illnesses like diabetes,
cancer, and many others. Over our history, we have delivered over 12
million meals, including over 1.1 million last year. And with our
nationwide partners in the Food is Medicine Coalition, we have learned
that nutrition plays a crucial role in the healthcare space.
I want to thank the Subcommittee for shining a light on this
important issue. Since the 2022 White House Conference on Hunger,
Nutrition, and Health, healthcare stakeholders have been paying closer
attention to nutrition, and specifically how nutrition can be better
integrated into health care delivery. We have great experience with
this in Massachusetts; since 2020, our Medicaid program has provided
reimbursement for nutrition services through an innovative model funded
under an 1115 waiver. Community Servings now maintains contracts with
12 of the 17 Accountable Care Organizations participating in this
program. We have been able to achieve this integration because our
programs have been rigorously studied, including in a peer-reviewed
2019 study published in JAMA, which I have submitted with my written
testimony. That study found, among other benefits, that MTMs helped
achieve a 16 percent net savings on total health care spending due to
decreased emergency room visits, hospital admissions, and emergency
transportation services. The Aspen Institute has just released its
updated FIM Action Plan showing that there are many other studies
demonstrating that MTMs can significantly reduce healthcare utilization
and costs.
Medically tailored meals are a simple concept but are complicated
to implement. At Community Servings, our nutritionists evaluate each
client individually for their health and dietary needs, their community
access to food, and their ability to provide for themselves. The client
is then assigned one or a combination of Community Servings' 16 meal
plans to meet their food preferences and dietary requirements. We
provide a week's worth of meals at a time, often for both the client
and their family. In addition to the meals, the weekly delivery
includes snacks of fresh fruit and yogurt, and a quart of milk. We also
provide nutritional education and counseling to those we serve, so that
they have the tools to continue on a healthy path once they've moved
on. The results are powerful. Chuck, a 66-year-old with diabetes and
vascular issues, has lost over fifty pounds and avoided a foot
amputation since receiving a ``Cardiac Diabetic'' diet from Community
Servings. And Janet, a 60-year-old with an autoimmune disease and
cancer, credits Community Servings with ``tak(ing) an intimidating
burden off (her) plate'' by providing her with nutritious foods,
allowing her to focus entirely on her other health needs.
Our impact goes beyond the patients we serve; food is medicine
programs also benefit local food supply chains. Our Local Foods Program
intentionally sources as much food as we can from local providers,
totaling over 50,000 pounds of local fish, fruit, and vegetables every
year.
We have made great strides in increasing access to integrated food
with medicine, but more can still be done. Congress should increase
research funding through the National Institutes of Health to explore
the benefits of MTMs and should seek other avenues to integrate
nutritional interventions into programs like Medicare. We thank
Chairman Markey and Ranking Member Marshall for their brand new
legislation to increase access to food through community health centers
and primary care physicians, and we strongly support the bipartisan,
bicameral, MTM pilot bill led by Senator Booker and Ranking Member
Marshall; we need to be increasing such connections between the health
care system and the food system.
Again, I thank the Subcommittee for the opportunity to testify
today and welcome any questions you may have.
______
Senator Markey. I thank you so much, Ms. Terranova. Next,
we're going hear from Erin Martin, who is a gerontologist, and
serves as founder and director of FreshRx, a produce
prescription program which collaborates with primary care
clinics and local farmers to provide free nutritious produce to
people living with diabetes. Ms. Martin serves as president of
the Urban Ag Coalition, and co-leads the Oklahoma Food Is
Medicine Policy Coalition.
We welcome you, Ms. Martin. Whenever you feel ready, please
begin.
STATEMENT OF ERIN MARTIN, MASM GERONTOLOGIST, FOUNDER AND
DIRECTOR, FRESHRX OKLAHOMA, TULSA, OK
Ms. Martin. Chairman Markey, Ranking Member Marshall,
Members of the HELP Committee, thank you for this opportunity
to discuss the transformative power of the FreshRx Oklahoma
program. My name is Erin Martin. I'm a gerontologist, the
director of FreshRx Oklahoma, the co-lead of Oklahoma's Food is
Medicine Policy Coalition, and a proud member of the National
Produce Prescription Collaborative.
I started working in long-term care when I was 15 years
old. Since then, I have worked in all levels of long-term care,
including HUD housing for 62 and older where I saw people on 15
to 32 prescription drugs per year. During that time, I attended
the first and leading school of gerontology in the world, at
the University of Southern California. And in Italy with USC, I
studied death and dying and begin to study the blue zones where
people die of something called old age on zero prescription
drugs.
I started to understand deeply the connection of food and
health. When the pandemic hit, a physician from North Tulsa
shared that his diabetic patients were compliant in their
medications and their doctor's visits, but that their health
was still declining.
To try to address this, we co-founded FreshRx Oklahoma, a
produce prescription program that launched in North Tulsa; a
community with an eight and a half year, sometimes longer
lifespan difference from South Tulsa, a community without a
grocery store for 14 years, and a community with the highest
mortality rates of diabetes in our county.
Our program empowers individuals with type 2 diabetes by
providing them with biweekly locally grown produce for 12
months, along with four to six cooking and nutrition classes
per month, and quarterly health metric checkpoints.
Participants or members as we call them, are either self-
referred or referred from healthcare professionals at one of
our 22 partnering primary care clinics. This also includes
federally Qualified Health Centers, PACE clinics and clinics
even serving the uninsured.
Provider Partners utilize a prescription form to refer the
patient and verify their diagnosis. From there, we enroll the
member and they begin the program at the very next food
distribution cycle where they receive a starter kit complete
with cooking utensils, cookbooks, and more.
This program has significantly shown success in reducing
A1C levels and weight, enhancing both quality of life and
reducing medical costs. With our first 300 patients, 80 percent
have shown a reduction in their A1C level with an average
reduction of 2.2 points.
Our largest reduction we've seen went from a 13.6 to a 5.4
in less than 6 months, and our record weight loss was just hit
at 116 pounds fully reversing her type 2 diabetes and coming
off all of her medications. Many of our members report having
had diabetes for over a decade, but experiencing improvements
in just a matter of weeks in our program.
I'm extremely proud of what FreshRx has accomplished, but
I'm also proud of my colleagues across the country who are
leading other successful produce prescription efforts.
There are many ways to provide these services, including
prepaid debit cards that can be used in retail, farmer's market
vouchers, and even online shopping models that work well for
different communities.
Programs must reflect the communities for which they serve,
providing food that is culturally relevant and supporting
dignity of choice. Our specific model supports local
agriculture, stimulates local economies, and most importantly
transforms lives through improved health.
I'm pleased to share that since its beginning, FreshRx has
expanded into beyond North Tulsa to five rural cities with the
Muscogee Creek Nation to serve their diabetic and pre-diabetic
populations.
Implementing Food is Medicine is a smart economic decision
with an enormous return on investment. Our program success is a
testament to the power of integrating a Food is Medicine
approach with our healthcare framework and providing a
regenerative cost-effective solution to our Nation's health
crisis.
The Senate Health Committee has an opportunity to integrate
produce prescriptions across Federal health programs. Doing so
offers a promising pathway to not only manage and prevent
chronic disease, but to save on healthcare spending and
resurrect local economies. Again, thank you for considering the
potential of Food is Medicine.
I'm eager to answer any questions and discuss how we can
expand these vital services to enhance health outcomes across
our Country.

prepared statement of erin martin
Chairman Markey, Ranking Member Marshall, Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for allowing me the opportunity to testify
before you today.
My name is Erin Martin. I am a Gerontologist and the Founder and
Director of FreshRx Oklahoma, \1\ a non-profit committed to providing
nutrient dense, locally grown produce to help people manage their
diabetes and improve their overall health. We do this by running a
Produce Prescription program which first launched in North Tulsa, a
community that hadn't had a grocery store in over 14 years with the
highest rates of mortality from diabetes in the county. There is a
significant longevity gap between residents of North and South Tulsa,
with data indicating an approximate 8.5-year difference in average life
expectancy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.freshrxok.org/.
FreshRx is a member of the National Produce Prescription
Collaborative (NPPC). Since 2019, NPPC has worked to catalyze the vital
role of food and nutrition in improving health outcomes by collectively
leveraging the unique opportunities for Produce Prescriptions to
achieve wellness. The collaborative's diverse membership of over 60
organizations includes program operator representatives from various
geographies, research, education, healthcare policy, and national
networks working to embed and institutionalize Produce Prescriptions as
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
a health intervention tool.
The annual burden of diabetes on the U.S. economy is staggering,
costing approximately $412.9 billion in 2022. This includes $306.6
billion in direct medical costs and an additional $106.3 billion
stemming from lost productivity. \2\ The evidence is clear: diet-
related interventions can dramatically reduce these costs. In Tulsa,
our Produce Prescription program has already made significant strides.
Participants, especially those with Type 2 diabetes and other diet-
related diseases, have shown remarkable health improvements--ranging
from reduced A1c levels to significant weight loss.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37909353/#:?:text=Results.
The Produce Prescription Journey
Our program, and other programs like ours, eliminate barriers to
healthy food while empowering people to create long lasting behavioral
change. Produce Prescriptions are a viable medical intervention and
should be prioritized for those with diet-related diseases and as a
supportive measure to a wider array of medical conditions. A few
insurers and health systems are beginning to adopt it as a preventative
service for patients who are eligible due to diet-related health risk
or condition and food insecurity or other documented challenges in
accessing nutritious foods. These prescriptions can be fulfilled
through farmers markets, food retail, and CSAs (farm subscription
models) to enable patients to access healthy produce with no added
fats, sugars, or salt, at low or no cost to the patient. Produce
Prescriptions are designed to improve health outcomes, optimize medical
spending, and increase patient engagement and satisfaction.
While the Produce Prescription intervention model began just over a
decade ago, today, more than 100 organizations administer programs
across the country. The impacts of these programs have been undeniable
and warrant serious consideration by all who wish to improve the health
and the lives of vulnerable Americans in a cost-effective way.
My journey to Produce Prescriptions began through my extensive
experience in long term care starting at the age of fifteen. After
working in all levels of long-term care by the time I was 24 years old,
I realized the importance and innovation of food as medicine as a
mechanism to give people more ways to stay healthy. While learning
about the natural biological processes of aging in my Masters program
at the premier and world leading Leonard Davis School of Gerontology, I
discovered serious discrepancies between the way we are supposed to age
biologically, the ways people are aging in other countries, and the way
we are aging in the United States. If you are 65 and older in the U.S.,
you are on an average of 15 or more prescription drugs per year. If you
are over 50 in the U.S., you have at least one chronic condition. In
fact, I saw clients who were on anywhere between 15 and 32 prescription
drugs at one time. I studied Death and Dying with the University of
Southern California in Italy and then, began to study the Blue Zones of
the world.
The concept of ``Blue Zones'' refers to regions in the world where
people have unusually long lifespans. Five regions have been identified
as Blue Zones: Okinawa (Japan), Sardinia (Italy), Nicoya (Costa Rica),
Icaria (Greece), and Loma Linda (California, USA). Despite the
geographical and cultural differences, their diets share several common
traits that contribute to their longevity. Their diet has an emphasis
on whole, minimally processed foods. This means less sugar, fewer
refined grains, and fewer processed foods. Diets are rich in healthy
fats, primarily from sources like olive oil, nuts, and seeds. In
Okinawa, for instance, the consumption of fish provides omega-3 fatty
acids. Many of the Blue Zones practice some form of caloric restriction
or mindful eating. This can be through cultural habits of eating until
only 80 percent full or fasting practices. I found that people in these
areas, unlike Americans, were dying of something called ``old age'' on
zero prescription drugs.
Produce Prescription Model in Oklahoma
My venture into Food is Medicine was furthered once I moved back to
Tulsa, Oklahoma, a city where I had grown up, just before the COVID-19
pandemic hit. I saw firsthand the dire need for food access,
improvements in the healthcare system, and the vast longevity
difference between a North and South Tulsa. A physician, Dr. Kent
Farish from Crossover Health Services in North Tulsa came forward and
expressed that his patients were compliant in their medications and
their doctors visits but they were not getting better and he knew it
was the food they had access to and were consuming that was the
culprit.
Like many areas across the United States, parts of Oklahoma face
economic and community factors that have led to food shortages and
highlighted the vulnerabilities within our overtaxed healthcare system.
North Tulsa had been without a grocery store for over 14 years plagued
by a history of health and racial inequities.
In 2021, we started the first-of-its-kind PRx in the state of
Oklahoma with 52 patients, providing a trifecta of access to local,
fresh food, engaging and empowering education, and utilizing health
metric checkpoints. We are proud to receive funding from private
donors, private philanthropic organizations such as St. John Ascension,
MorningCrest Health Foundation, Fazel Family Foundation, the Zarrow
Commemoration Fund, and the Federal Government. Our Federal funding
comes from the USDA NIFA GusNIP programming. GusNIP supports projects
that demonstrate the impact of PRxs on fruit and vegetable consumption,
food insecurity and healthcare usage for vulnerable populations.
Physicians and other healthcare providers send a referral to
FreshRx Oklahoma verifying their diagnosis and starting metrics (HbA1c,
weight, and blood pressure). Our team enrolls the patient by conducting
a full survey that captures additional data like mental health, pain
management, socialization, medical adherence, hospitalizations, and
more. The patient then starts the program at the next bi-weekly
distribution date and receives a starter kit including cooking
utensils, a cookbook, and a produce storage sheet. They receive free,
local fruits and vegetables bi-weekly for 12 months along with 4-6
cooking and nutrition classes per month. We measure health metrics
quarterly to mark the patient's progress and engage patients in ongoing
feedback to ensure the program is meeting their needs.
As part of our GusNIP requirement, we work with an Internal Review
Board (IRB) at Langston University in Oklahoma to provide ethical
oversight, and help us to maintain HIPAA compliance, and review patient
documents. We also contract with Oklahoma State University to act as
our data partner, evaluating our pre-and post-survey data, to determine
whether or not we are achieving our program goals (i.e. calculating if
increased consumption of fresh produce by our patients is actually
correlated to better health).
Patient and Community Impact
Our typical patients are people living with Type 2 diabetes in
North Tulsa experiencing food insecurity and most recently, we are
serving those with prediabetes in the Muscogee Creek Nation. We are
deeply honored to serve the Muscogee Creek Nation while this program
fits into their larger plan for public health and food sovereignty. 39
Native American nations call Oklahoma their home. Diabetes plagues
Native Americans at a higher rate than any other group of people. In
fact, 1 out of 2 Native American children born after the year 2000 will
be diagnosed with Type 2 diabetes.
We had a participant who was a veteran who slept on the floor of
his apartment who hadn't had produce in over 2 years. He cried every
time he got food from our program. He made a soup with all of the
greens we gave him and he reported that the ``floaters'' in his eyes
had disappeared in a few short weeks.
We had another participant who was feeling lethargic and unhappy.
She was diagnosed at age 60 with Type 2 Diabetes. In our program, she
lost 50 pounds and her HbA1c level went from a 9.6 to a 5.4. She now
reports feeling happier, treating others with more kindness, exercising
daily, and being able to keep up with her grandkids. Our greatest HbA1c
reduction has been from a 13.6 to a 5.4 in 6 months! Recently, we had a
record weight loss of 111 pounds!
These examples are not unique. Through our work, we have
consistently improved intake of fruits and vegetables, improved overall
dietary consumption, reduced the gap between actual consumption and the
national daily recommendations, lowered weight, lowered blood pressure,
and lowered Hemoglobin A1c among program participants.
In fact, our program targets key risk factors like blood glucose
levels, blood pressure, and weight. On average, our patients see a 2.2
percent decrease in A1c levels, 13-point reduction in blood pressure,
and an average weight loss of 9 pounds with many weight losses above 20
to 72 pounds. Patients in our program, many who have struggled with
diabetes for 15 to 20 years, start experiencing improvement in a matter
of weeks. Every meal impacts our health.
We have shown a significant statistical correlation between the
increased consumption of fruits and vegetables with the overall
improvement of health. We have shown a significant statistical increase
in the consumption of garden salads and vegetable soup. At the same
time, we have shown a significant statistical decrease in the
consumption of soda.
Potential Economic Benefits
This program is making an impact on health care spending in our
state. For example, if we scaled to 1,200 participants, it would cost
$3 million and the cost savings would be $25 million for the state of
Oklahoma. Let's say we have a 70 percent success rate, a cost of $5,000
per patient, along with the national average cost of diabetes care, and
the number of Oklahomans with diabetes, the net savings for Oklahoma
could be close to $2.6 billion when scaled statewide. And that is just
in Oklahoma!
At the same time, Produce Prescriptions support local economies
through the agriculture purchases and jobs being created. We have
supported 27 small-scale farming businesses and expanded the volume,
diversity, and seasonal production at 15 farms. In fact, the Food is
Medicine movement has an economic ripple effect in the healthcare
industry, the agricultural industry, and workforce development that can
transform lives and restore communities.
In the last 4 years, we have tripled in size and expanded to serve
patients at 22 primary care clinics including federally Qualified
Health Centers, PACE clinics, and clinics serving the uninsured. We
mostly serve those over 50 years of age, we see success at all ages,
including participants all the way into their 90's finding success. We
have received national attention for the innovative way we
systematically address food and health.
I am extremely proud of our program and all that it has
accomplished. I am also proud of my colleagues across the country who
are leading the way on produce prescription efforts. FreshRx Oklahoma
is one of many models that work. There are many ways to provide these
services, including prepaid debit cards for retail like AboutFresh or
in Kansas there is an online ordering model called Attane Health.
The results we are seeing are not unique to our state. Research has
shown that prescribing healthy food to patients could prevent as many
as 3.28 million medical conditions such as heart attacks and strokes
and save more than $100 billion in healthcare costs. Subsidizing fruits
and veggies would prevent 1.93 million cardiovascular events such as
heart attacks and 350,000 deaths. \3\, \4\ Time and again, these,
relatively low-cost interventions have been found to yield improved
health outcomes over time, including lowering weight, blood pressure,
and HbA1c levels with an incredible health cost savings return on
investment. This is not only an intervention that works, but an
economic and viable business investment. Moreover, patients achieving
these results through PRx have also reduced their reliance on more
costly medications and other medical interventions (and increased
medical adherence).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://www.nih.gov/news-events/nih-research-matters/
prescribing-healthy-foods-could-bring-cost-effective-benefits.
\4\ https://www.fastcompany.com/90323580/prescribing-fruits-and-
veggies-would-save-100-billion-in-medical-costs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Congressional Opportunities
While investments in PRx are starting to happen at the Federal
level, including at USDA and Indian Health Services, there are a number
of opportunities to infuse Produce Prescriptions into health programs
not only across the Department of Health and Human Services, including
the Administration on Aging, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services, and the Health Resources and Services Administration, but
across the Federal Government, including within the Department of
Veterans Affairs.
One near-term opportunity for this Committee to consider to advance
access to Food as Medicine programs is through the upcoming
reauthorization of the Older Americans Act (OAA). Since its inception
in 1965, the OAA has provided a broad range of critical services and
support for older adults, including nutrition services. Today's OAA has
an opportunity to further encourage healthy aging, by strengthening the
connection between food and health interventions for diet-related
disease through PRx.
Given the breadth of their reach in urban and rural areas, OAA
programs have the potential to engage program participants and provide
meaningful interventions earlier that will lead to improved quality of
life and healthier aging. Produce Prescriptions, Medically Tailored
Groceries, and Medically Tailored Meals, as well as other Food is
Medicine programs, would complement meals on wheels and congregate meal
services being provided under OAA. These programs truly have the
potential to elevate current programs and produce measurable health
outcomes.
Another place where this Committee could help advance Food as
Medicine access is within the Health Resources and Services
Administration (HRSA) community health center program. A growing number
of local Produce Prescription programs are beginning to partner with
community health centers to bring this nexus of healthy food and health
care together for low income and underserved individuals living with or
at risk of chronic conditions. Including Food as Medicine among the
allowable health services provided within the community health center
setting would enable these programs to flourish at the local level.
I appreciate the Committee examining current and future
opportunities of food as medicine funding pathways and implementation.
The food we consume not only serves as a source of energy, but also
contains nutrients that positively impact our bodies and promote
healing to enhance our overall health and well-being. When we eat
whole, unprocessed foods rich in essential nutrients, vitamins,
minerals, antioxidants, and phytochemicals, these foods work to reduce
inflammation and boost immunity, promoting more wellness and
resilience.
A good diet plays a crucial role in maintaining a balanced immune
system, reducing the risk of chronic diseases such as heart disease,
diabetes, and certain cancers, and supporting optimal bodily functions.
By being intentional with what we eat, we can harness the healing power
of food to improve health outcomes, and prevent, manage, and even treat
various health conditions.
The best part is that food as medicine recognizes the uniqueness of
each person's specific dietary and cultural needs. It encourages people
to explore different foods and customize what they eat in a way that
works for them with dignity.
It can be difficult for anyone to stay compliant with doctor's
orders, let alone those living with food insecurity and poverty.
Produce Prescriptions get patients the nutrient-dense food they need to
be back in control of their disease. Integrating Produce Prescriptions
into the Federal health system provides the opportunity to transform
public health.
Again, thank you. I look forward to answering your questions.
______
Senator Marshall. Good. Mr. Chairman, next I want to
introduce Dr. Dariush Mozaffarian, who's the director of the
Food is Medicine Institute at Tufts University, located in
Boston, Massachusetts. Dr. Mozaffarian is a cardiologist, a
scientist and globally recognized expert in nutrition, medicine
and public health.
I've had the opportunity to work collaboratively with him
since being a freshman in the House of Representatives where we
co-founded the Food is Medicine Working Program. As one of the
leading experts on Food is Medicine, Dariush was invited here
today to share the vast contribution he's made in making Food
as Medicine, something we can apply successfully across our
health system.
Dr. Mozaffarian is also proof of the American dream. He's
the child of immigrants. He couldn't get into Kansas State, so
he went to Stanford University to get his bachelor's degree, an
M.D. at Columbia University and a doctorate in public health at
Harvard University.
Thank you for agreeing to testify and sharing your
expertise with us.
Dr. Mozaffarian.
STATEMENT OF DARIUSH MOZAFFARIAN, M.D., DRPH, DIRECTOR, FOOD IS
MEDICINE INSTITUTE, TUFTS UNIVERSITY, BOSTON, MA
Dr. Mozaffarian. Chairman Markey, Ranking Member Marshall,
and distinguished Committee Members, thank you for the
opportunity to share what I've learned and what I've seen from
Americans across our great nation.
As a heart doctor, I see firsthand people of all ages and
backgrounds suffering from diet related diseases. As a public
health expert, I see the incredible challenges Americans face
every day to obtain and eat nourishing food. And as a
researcher, I study the science on how foods affect health and
I study the effect of policy changes to achieve well-being and
health equity over the course of any given year.
I see and speak with thousands of people, thousands of
Americans, who know in their gut that our food is making them
sick and yet feel helpless to do anything about it. This
inability to eat well is literally lethal. Poor nutrition is
the top cause of death and disability in the United States. I
should drop the mic there, causing more harms than tobacco use,
alcohol, opioids, physical inactivity and air pollution.
Each week, the food we eat is estimated to kill 10,000
Americans, cause 1,500 new cases of cancer, and cause 16,000
new cases of diabetes, each week. These likely underestimate
the full harms given what we're now learning about the effects
of our food on the gut microbiome, the brain depression and
mental health, child development, autoimmune diseases, immune
function and more.
This is also driving societal discord. Each year, 40
million Americans, one in eight households, experience food
insecurity, which is linked to worse nutrition, more diet
related disease, and greater healthcare spending. Americans
with lower incomes in rural communities and from marginalized
racial and ethnic groups are at highest risk.
Our food is also an urgent matter of National Security.
Eight in 10 young Americans don't qualify for the military and
the leading medical disqualifier is overweight and obesity.
Poor nutrition is crushing our economy causing $1.1
trillion in economic losses every year from preventable
healthcare spending and loss productivity. For diabetes alone,
the U.S. Government alone spends nearly $200 billion each year
on direct medical costs for a disease that is almost entirely
preventable and treatable with better food.
As detailed in my written testimony, the economic costs of
diet related diseases are also crushing U.S. families, U.S.
businesses, the Federal budget and the National debt. The lack
of attention to these harms of our food explains so much about
the problems our Country faces today. Tens of millions of sick
Americans, hundreds of billions of dollars in preventable
healthcare costs, suffering U.S. businesses, exhausted state
and Federal budgets, and frankly, exhausted policymakers
fighting over the shrinking remainder.
Senators, if you want to do the things that you believe are
important for the American people, you will never have the
resources you need until we reduce healthcare spending.
This will not happen until we fix food. The nation state of
diet related disease is not Okay, it's not normal and we can
fix it. Nutrition is the top cause of poor health and yet
historically has been ignored by the healthcare system. This is
finally changing with Food is Medicine interventions.
My written testimony describes the various types of Food is
Medicine therapies, you've heard from the preceding witnesses
on these, their efficacy and their cost equivalence or even
cost savings compared to traditional medical treatments.
As shown in many states and in private healthcare
demonstration projects around the country, Food is Medicine can
improve health and save money, there's almost nothing in
healthcare that can do both of those things.
Food is Medicine programs can also support local farmers
and regional food systems serving as an economic engine for
rural communities. With the current evidence and progress, the
Nation is at a tipping point to potentially accelerate Food is
Medicine, action is needed.
Today, the vast majority of Americans cannot access these
therapies and more research and implementation are critical to
assess which programs work best for which patients.
My written testimony summarizes potential congressional
actions in this area. For example, advancing Food is Medicine
at community health centers serving the most vulnerable
Americans who will benefit such as through S. 2840 introduced
by Senator Sanders and Marshall. Advancing Food is Medicine in
Medicare such as through S. 2133, introduced by Senators
Marshall, Cassidy, Booker, and Stabenow.
Integrating Food is Medicine into the older Americans Act,
including Produce Prescriptions and medically tailored meals.
Providing meaningful funding to NIH to launch Food is Medicine
Centers of Excellence, a concept which has already received NIH
clearance and is ready to go. And even utilizing report
language to encourage Food is Medicine and Medicaid 1115
waivers, Food is Medicine pilots at CMMI, food and nutrition
security screening and care referrals in the electronic medical
record.
Meaningful nutrition education for doctors, speaking to the
national accreditation and licensing organizations that oversee
U.S. medical education, healthcare systems, payers, doctors,
patients, public and private vendors, food retailers,
pharmacies, advocacy and clinical groups, and even from our
national polling, the American people all support Food is
Medicine.
It's time for congressional action to help bring Food is
Medicine to the American people. Thank you for the opportunity
to testify.

prepared statement of dariush mozaffarian
Dear Chairman Markey, Ranking Member Marshall, and distinguished
Members of the Committee:
I am grateful for the opportunity to testify and share what I have
seen and learned from Americans across our great Nation. I would also
like to extend my thanks to Senators currently advancing innovative
Food is Medicine legislative and policy proposals that are supported by
diverse stakeholders.
My Expertise
My testimony reflects my expertise and experiences as a
cardiologist, scientist, and public health expert. I serve as Director
of the Food is Medicine Institute at Tufts University, an institute
dedicated to understanding how to effectively integrate food-based
nutritional treatments into healthcare. As a doctor, I see firsthand
people of all ages and backgrounds suffering from diet-related
illnesses. As a public health scientist, I see the incredible
challenges Americans face, every day, to obtain and eat nourishing
food. As a researcher, I focus on the science and practice of what we
need to eat to keep our bodies healthy; and on the most effective
policy and systems changes to support good nutrition, well-being, and
health equity.
Over the course of any given year, I see and speak with thousands
of people who are not as healthy as they could be. They are doing their
best to care for themselves, and their families, patients,
constituents, and employees. Most feel a vague unease about the harm
our food is doing--and have no idea what the remedy is. Ordinary
Americans face food-fad whiplash. Doctors watch their patients grow
more obese and ever sicker. Policymakers with good intentions continue
to make decisions based on dangerously outdated science. Social media
adds to the confusion: thousands of influencers are now paid by the
worst elements of the food industry to cynically pitch anti-nutrition
messages--``advice'' that can be literally lethal.
I'm here to say: This is not okay. We can fix this. And you and
your colleagues across the Senate and House have a responsibility to do
so.
Some ask me: how did a cardiologist become so focused on food and
nutrition? My response: why isn't every cardiologist focused on food
and nutrition? During my years of training in medical school, internal
medicine residency, and cardiology fellowship, it was obvious that poor
nutrition was the top driver of disease in most of my patients. And
yet, we didn't learn anything meaningful on nutrition and health
throughout my medical school training.
Think about that: the top cause of poor health in the United
States--nutrition--is largely ignored by our healthcare system. This
explains so many of the problems we face today.
The Facts
Poor nutrition is the leading cause of death and
disability in the United States--causing more health harms than
other major risk factors such as tobacco use, alcohol, opioids,
physical inactivity, or air pollution (see Figure 1 at the end
of this testimony).
Y The food we eat is estimated to kill 10,000
Americans each week, cause 1,500 new cases of cancer
each week, and cause 16,000 new cases of diabetes each
week. \1\, \2\, \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ U.S. Burden of Disease Collaborators, Mokdad AH, Ballestros K,
et al. The State of U.S. Health, 1990-2016: Burden of Diseases,
Injuries, and Risk Factors Among U.S. States. JAMA. 2018;319(14):1444-
1472.
\2\ Zhang FF, Cudhea F, Shan Z, et al. Preventable Cancer Burden
Associated With Poor Diet in the United States. JNCI Cancer Spectr.
2019;3(2):pkz034.
\3\ O'Hearn M, Lara-Castor L, Cudhea F, et al. Incident type 2
diabetes attributable to suboptimal diet in 184 countries. Nature
medicine. 2023;29(4):982-995.
Y These horrifying statistics likely underestimate the
harms of our food, given what we are learning about
effects of nutrition on the gut microbiome, brain
health, depression, child development, autoimmune
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
diseases, immune function, and more.
When I entered medical school in 1991, we did not
have these national epidemics of obesity or diabetes.
Y This has happened in our adult lifetimes, under our
noses--under our watch.
Y This is very new: and the main driver is the recent
changes to our food.
Americans are failing nutrition. The average score on
the Healthy Eating Index (HEI)--a measure of adherence with the
Dietary Guidelines--is 58 out of 100. You don't have to be a
college professor to know that's an F.
Y The problem is two-fold. First, we eat too much
refined starch, sugar, salt, and other additives. These
come from highly processed foods, especially in the
form of ``acellular nutrients.'' For the first time in
human history, we are breaking down food into its
molecules components that we shape and manipulate,
devoid of all natural cell structure. This is harming
our cells, causing a rush of rapidly digested nutrients
into our bloodstream; and also starving our gut
bacteria, leaving too few nutrients to reach our large
gut. This ``double hit'' is driving obesity, diabetes,
and more.
Y The second problem is that we eat too few fruits,
vegetables, nuts, beans, whole grains, seafood, and
yogurt (see Figure 2 at the end of this testimony).
These minimally processed foods are rich in fermentable
fibers, bioactive phytonutrients, and other compounds
that nourish our bodies and our gut bacteria.
Y Critically, when these harms are tabulated, both are
important, but the lack of healthy foods is causing
more health problems than the excess of harmful
compounds. This is important: we can't only fight food
like tobacco, aiming to regulate, tax, and penalize
unhealthy items. We must also reward, incentivize, and
value healthy food for its true health and economic
benefits. We will return to this when we discuss Food
is Medicine.
Poor nutrition is crushing our economy. Poor
nutrition is estimated to rack up $1.1 trillion in economic
losses every year from preventable healthcare spending and lost
productivity. \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ The Rockefeller Foundation. True Cost of Food: Measuring What
Maters to Transform the U.S. Food System. 2021. htps://
www.rockefellerfoundation.org/report/true-cost-of-food-measuring-what-
maters-to-transform-the-u-s-food-system/. Accessed June 17, 2022.
Y For just one condition, type 2 diabetes--a malady
almost entirely preventable and treatable with good
nutrition--the U.S. Government spends $187 billion
annually on direct medical costs. \5\ This is more than
the entire budgets of many agencies and departments.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Parker ED, Lin J, Mahoney T, et al. Economic Costs of Diabetes
in the U.S. in 2022. Diabetes Care. 2024;47(1):26-43.
Y The costs of diet-related diseases are crushing
families. Over the last 30 years, the average family on
employer-sponsored insurance has lost $125,000 in
cumulative wages due to rising healthcare premiums. \6\
Today, the leading cause of household bankruptcy is
catastrophic medical expenses. And relative losses are
highest for rural, low-income, Black, and Hispanic
families.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Hager K, Emanuel E, Mozaffarian D. Employer-Sponsored Health
Insurance Premium Cost Growth and Its Association With Earnings
Inequality Among U.S. Families. JAMA Netw Open. 2024;7(1):e2351644.
Y The costs of diet-related diseases are crushing U.S.
businesses. The average premium for employer-sponsored
healthcare has risen 50 percent in just 10 years. \7\
Warren Buffet has called rising healthcare premiums
``the tapeworm of American economic competitiveness.''
And the food we eat is feeding that worm.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Center for American Progress. Federal Solutions To Address
Rising Costs of Employer-Sponsored Insurance. 2024.htps://
www.americanprogress.org/article/Federal-solutions-to-address-rising-
costs-of-employer-sponsored-insurance/. Accessed April 12, 2024.
Y The costs of diet-related diseases are crushing the
Federal budget and national debt. In 1969, the year I
was born, 5 percent of the Federal budget was spent on
healthcare. Today, it's 30 percent. This is by far the
fastest rising discretionary cost in the Federal
budget--crowding out every other priority including
defense, border control, infrastructure, education, and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
more.
Y Senators, if you want to do the things that you
believe are important for the American people, you will
never have the funds you need until we reduce
healthcare spending. And healthcare spending will never
go down until we fix food.
This is also an urgent matter of national security.
\8\ Don't take my word for it, listen to Mission: Readiness, a
group of more than 700 retired U.S. generals and admirals who
have been making this case for more than a decade.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Mission: Readiness, Council for a Strong America. Breaking
point: Child malnutrition imperils America's national security. 2020.
htps://www.strongna.on.org/articles/1335-breaking-point. Accessed
September 30, 2022.
Y In 1941, President Franklin D. Roosevelt convened
the National Nutrition Conference on Defense, \9\ to
create urgent new policies to fix the food supply, when
1 in 3 young Americans did not qualify for the draft
due to nutritional deficiencies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ National Nutrition Conference for Defense. National Nutrition
Conference for Defense. JAMA. 1941;116(23):2598-2599.
Y Today, nearly 8 in 10 young Americans don't qualify
for military service, and the top medical disqualifer
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
is overweight and obesity.
Y For our Nation's sake, our elected leaders today
must have the same vision and urgency as FDR to fix our
food system.
Today, being healthy is the exception. Far more
Americans are sick than well. Poor diets are the primary reason
that 7 in 10 adults have overweight or obesity, and 1 in 2 have
diabetes or prediabetes. \10\ Adding blood pressure and
cholesterol levels, only 1 in 15 adults has optimal
cardiometabolic health. \11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Task Force on Hunger, Nutrition, and Health. Ambitious,
Actionable Recommendations to End Hunger, Advance Nutrition, and
Improve Health in the United States: Executive Summary. 2022. htps://
informingwhc.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/08/Informing-White-House-
Conference-Task-Force-Report-Aug22-Executive-Summary.pdf. Accessed June
21, 2023.
\11\ O'Hearn M, Lauren BN, Wong JB, Kim DD, Mozaffarian D. Trends
and Disparities in Cardiometabolic Health Among U.S. Adults, 1999-2018.
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2022;80(2):138-151.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Y Most American adults are walking around sick, many
without even realizing it.
Y For the first time in U.S. history, life expectancy
has been declining--and diet-related chronic diseases
are a leading contributor.
Y This starts young. Among 2-5 year-olds, more than 1
in 8 have obesity. Among teens, nearly 1 in 4 have
obesity, and 1 in 4 have prediabetes.
The burdens of our food are also driving societal
discord. Americans of all incomes, races, and ethnicities--and
all political parties, states, and cities--are experiencing
high and risings levels of diet-related diseases. But those
with lower incomes, living in rural communities, and from
historically marginalized racial and ethnic groups are at even
higher risk.
Y Forty million Americans--about 1 in 8 households--
also experienced food insecurity at some point during
the year. Food insecurity is associated with worse
nutrition, higher rates of diet-related diseases, and
greater healthcare spending.
The lack of attention to our food explains so much
about the problems we face today: hundreds of millions of sick
Americans, hundreds of billions of dollars in preventable
healthcare costs, suffering U.S. businesses, exhausted Federal
and state budgets--and exhausted policymakers.
The Power of Food is Medicine
Having devoted my career to understanding what we need to eat to
stay healthy, and to studying private and public food systems changes
to empower people to eat that way, I've been on the front lines helping
people sort through the confusion and make better decisions. My work
brings me face to face with everyday Americans, patients, doctors, and
healthcare executives. I meet CEOs and dynamic entrepreneurs who grow,
package, and prepare our food; community activists fighting for health
and food justice; and elected officials charged with fixing our food
and health problems.
My testimony today brings together my training, the newest science,
and these real-world experiences to provide effective, practical
solutions to our national nutrition crisis. One of the top solutions
sweeping the nation is: Food is Medicine.
Food is Medicine (FIM) refers to food-based
nutritional therapies to manage disease within healthcare. \12\
FIM includes:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Mozaffarian D, Aspry KE, Garfield K, et al. ``Food is
Medicine'' Strategies for Nutrition Security and Cardiometabolic Health
Equity: JACC State-of-the-Art Review J Am Coll Cardiol. 2024; in press.
Y Physician screening and referral for appropriate
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
medical conditions.
Y Treatment with medically tailored meals, medically
tailored groceries, or produce prescriptions.
Y Accompanying nutrition and culinary education,
delivered by RDNs, telehealth, or digital counseling.
Y EMR screening for food and nutrition insecurity.
Y Links to healthcare payers and reimbursement.
Y Medical nutrition education for doctors.
Importantly, FIM can be used to treat and manage
disease--not just for long-term prevention.
Y Commonly targeted conditions include type 2
diabetes, high-risk pregnancy, heart failure, and
cancer.
While FM is a medical therapy, not a social program,
it also helps address important social determinants of health
like food insecurity and poverty.
Y This makes FM a unique ``dual purpose''
intervention--an executive medical treatment that also
addresses social determinants of health and advances
health equity, giving all Americans a fair opportunity
to achieve their top level of health.
Whether using meals, groceries, or produce, FIM
provides nutritionally curated items, covered in part or full
by healthcare, to treat a patient's diet-sensitive condition.
These programs can cut through barriers such as cost,
transportation, and inadequate knowledge around healthy food.
Research we and others have conducted shows that FIM
programs work.
Y They increase the intake of healthy foods, reduce
food insecurity, and improve health outcomes.
Y Observed benefits include lower hemoglobin A1c, body
mass index, and blood pressure, as well as improved
mental health and disease self-management.
When targeted to high-risk patients with complex
medical conditions, FIM programs also save money. Careful
analyses indicate that FIM interventions will be either highly
cost-effective or even cost-saving compared to many other
common medical interventions.
1 percent of Americans produce 25 percent of
healthcare costs; and 5 percent of Americans produce 50 percent
of healthcare costs. \13\ Medically tailored meals are an
effective, cost-saving treatment for such high-risk, high-
utilization patients.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Kaiser Family Foundation. How do health expenditures vary
across the population? 2024. htps://www.healthsystemtracker.org/chart-
collection/health-expenditures-vary-across-population/ Accessed April
14, 2024.
Y In one state analysis, a medically tailored meals
program resulted in net annual savings of $9000 for
each patient treated--even after accounting for the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
costs of the program.
Y Our research estimates that about 6 million
Americans qualify for medically tailored meals, and
that providing this treatment to these patients will
save nearly $14 billion annually--even accounting for
the costs of the program (see Figure 3 at the end of
this testimony). \14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Hager K, Cudhea FP, Wong JB, et al. Association of National
Expansion of Insurance Coverage of Medically Tailored Meals With
Estimated Hospitalizations and Health Care Expenditures in the U.S.
JAMA Netw Open. 2022;5(10):e2236898.
Medical groceries and produce prescriptions are also
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
highly cost-effective or even cost-saving.
Y North Carolina recently evaluated their Medicaid
1115 waiver experience, which included prominent FIM
programming, delivered to 20,000 Medicaid beneficiaries
across 33 mostly rural counties in the state. They
found that, even accounting for the costs of the
program, the intervention resulted in net cost savings
for Medicaid. \15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Healthcare Innovation. North Carolina Plans to Expand
Medicaid SDOH Pilot statewide. 2024 htps://www.hcinnovationgroup.com/
population-health-management/social-determinants-of-health/news/
55002542/north-carolina-plans-to-expand-Medicaid-sdoh-pilot-statewide.
Accessed April 12, 2024.
Y Our new research estimates that if about $45 per
month of produce prescriptions were provided to
Americans with diabetes and food insecurity, the
program within 5 years would prevent 65,000
cardiovascular events and--due to healthcare cost
savings--have no additional net cost. Over a lifetime,
the program would prevent nearly 300,000 cardiovascular
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
events and save more than $3 billion.
FIM programs can also support local food systems,
farmers, and rural communities.
Y Several FIM programs, such as Recipe4Health in
Alameda County, California, focus on procuring food
from local small and mid-sized farmers. This serves as
an economic engine for farmers, their families, and
their communities.
Food is Medicine is Accelerating--But Much More is Needed
Based on these health and cost benefits, FIM is accelerating across
the nation.
Ten states now have section 1115 waivers to implement
FIM in Medicaid: California, Delaware, Illinois, Massachusetts,
New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Oregon, North Carolina, and
Washington. Groups in other states are pushing for similar
waivers, such as in Oklahoma, Florida, and others.
Medicare Advantage programs across the country are
implementing FIM based on Congress' 2018 expansion of Special
Supplemental Benefits for the Chronically Ill (SSBCI). In 2020
when the program launched, 71 plans covered medically tailored
meals, and 101 plans covered medical groceries and produce
prescriptions. Today, 422 plans cover medically tailored meals,
and 929 plans cover medical groceries and produce
prescriptions.
The Department of Veterans Affairs and the Indian
Health Service have launched FIM pilot programs.
The Department of Health and Human Services recently
held its first FIM Summit, and CMS and CMMI are together
developing toolkits and definitions for FIM programs.
Large commercial payers are implementing FIM,
including Elevance, Blue Cross Blue Shield, Geisinger Health,
and Promedica.
Kaiser Permanente, the largest nonprofit integrated
health system in the nation, is coordinating its 5 years of
growing FIM programs into the nation's first healthcare FIM
Center of Excellence.
EPIC and other large commercial EMRs are integrating
food insecurity screening into their applications.
Nonprofits across the nation are implementing FIM,
including within coalitions like the Food is Medicine Coalition
and National Produce Prescription Collaborative.
Private sector companies are launching FIM programs,
like Instacart, Walmart, Kroger, and more.
Venture capital is investing in exciting FIM
startups, like Season Health, Territory Foods, NourishedRx,
Good Measures, Farmbox Rx, and more.
The Rockefeller Foundation and American Heart
Association have committed $250 million to FIM research.
The National Institutes of Health has approved a plan
to launch FIM Networks or Centers of Excellence, similar to the
NIH-funded Cancer Centers of Excellence that have been so
critical to advance cancer research and treatment.
The American Academy of Pediatrics and American
College of Lifestyle Medicine have committed to FIM training
for all their members.
The Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical
Education (ACGME) has announced plans to make medical nutrition
education mandatory for all residency and fellowship programs
by 2026.
These American Innovations Require Policy Updates
With the evidence and progress, the nation is at a tipping point to
accelerate FIM. More research and implementation projects are critical
to assess which FIM programs work best for which patients--especially
in Community Health Centers, Medicare, Medicaid, and the VA. This
includes:
Optimal dose ($/month), program duration, and
intensity of nutrition and culinary education.
Meals vs. groceries vs. produce; hospital pick-up vs.
retail shopping vs. home delivery.
Eligible disease conditions and social criteria.
Today, the vast majority of Americans cannot access FIM therapies.
Most states have not applied for Medicaid 1115
waivers to implement FIM.
Medicare Part A & B--which cover more than two-thirds
of Medicare enrollees--do not cover FIM.
Many commercial plans are awaiting greater clarity in
Federal healthcare around FIM.
FIM vendors and suppliers are not available in most
parts of the country.
Most doctors remain poorly educated around nutrition
and FIM.
It's time for congressional action to catalyze the scaling and
success of FIM. Congress should:
Include support for FIM programs at Community Health
Centers (such as proposed in S. 2840, introduced by Senators
Sanders and Marshall). These Centers serve the most vulnerable
Americans and are most likely to benefit from collaborations
and support in this space.
Encourage CMS to continue to release guidance and
toolkits to make it easier for states to apply for Medicaid
1115 waivers that include FIM.
Advance FIM in Medicare, such as through S. 2133, the
Medically Tailored Home-Delivered Meals Demonstration Pilot
Act, introduced by Senators Marshall, Cassidy, Booker, and
Stabenow in the Senate Finance Committee.
Encourage CMMI to incorporate and test FIM approaches
in their existing pilots.
Appropriate at least $40 million to the NIH Office of
the Director for the specific purpose of launching the FIM
Networks or Centers of Excellence, a concept which has already
received clearance at NIH. This initiative will combine
cutting-edge research with patient care, advancing FIM just as
the NIH Cancer Centers of Excellence have advanced cancer
treatment and control.
Provide a meaningful increase in support for the NIH
Office of Nutrition Research, which is today woefully
underfunded compared to other NIH Office of the Director
offices (see Table 1 on following pages) despite the pressing
importance of its research mission for the American people.
Support continuing FIM pilots at the Department of
Veterans Affairs and Indian Health Service.
Initiate FIM pilots for military personnel and their
families at the Department of Defense.
Expand support for produce prescriptions within the
USDA GusNIP program.
Ensure meaningful nutrition education for doctors by
contacting accreditation and licensing bodies to indicate that
it's time for change, including the American Association of
Medical Colleges (AAMC), Accreditation Council for Graduate
Medical Education (ACGME), Accreditation Council for Continuing
Medical Education (ACCME), and American Board of Internal
Medicine (ABIM).
Incorporate report language to encourage NIH to
implement FIM research across its institutes and centers,
coordinated by the Office of Nutrition Research.
Incorporate report language to encourage CMS to
accelerate food and nutrition security screening and clinical
care and referral pathways in the EMR.
Incorporate report language to ensure Health Savings
Account can be used for accepted FIM therapies.
Healthcare systems, payers, doctors, patients, public and private
sector vendors, and advocacy and clinical groups all support FIM. It's
time for Congressional action to bring FIM to the American people.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.
Figure 1. Modifiable causes of death in the United States. Source:
JAMA. 2018;319(14):1444-1472. doi:10.1001/jama.2018.0158/.

Figure 2. Dietary intakes of Americans compared to goals
(Dietary Guidelines for Americans). Source: htps://
www.dietaryguidelines.gov/sites/default/files/2021-11/DGA-202-2025-
CurrentIntakesSnapshot.pdf.

Figure 3. Estimated health effects, costs, and net savings of
providing medically tailored meals to the approximately 6.3 million
eligible Americans with high-risk, complex medical conditions and
limited activities of daily living. Source: htps://
tuftsfoodismedicine.org/true-cost-fim-case-study-report/.

Table 1. Fiscal year 2023 and fiscal year 2024 Funding for
Offices within the NIH Office of the Director. Source: htps://
officeofbudget.od.nih.gov/pdfs/FY25/insti-center-subs/27-OD-FY25-CJ-
Chapter.pdf.

__
Senator Marshall. Thank you, Dr. Dariush.
Next, Mr. Chairman, I'd like to introduce James Carter
Williams, the CEO and managing principle of iSelect Fund, a
venture capital firm that invest in technology that bridges the
gap between food, health and AgTech.
Mr. Williams has an extraordinary career problem solving
complex systems. An engineer by training, had a long stint in
developing innovative cost saving solutions for Boeing's
technology planning process that brought the F-18 in under
budget. He successfully invested in early stage ventures and
corporate research. He's now working to problem solve a more
complex system healthcare, with a unique mission centered on
food as health.
Our goal is to learn about the intersection of innovation
and investment that will help combat the obesity and diabetic
epidemic. He has an MBA from MIT Sloan School of Management and
a BS in Mechanical Engineering from Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute.
Thank you, Carter, for being here, and the floor is yours.
STATEMENT OF JAMES CARTER WILLIAMS, CEO AND MANAGING PRINCIPAL,
ISELECT FUND, ST. LOUIS, MO
Mr. Williams. Thank you. Chairman Markey, Ranking Member
Marshall, and distinguished Members, it's my pleasure to appear
before you today to reflect on the innovations reducing the
healthcare cost of poor nutrition. My name is Carter Williams.
I'm an engineer with a degree from Rensselaer and MIT.
Over the last 35 years, I've focused on innovation and
complex systems, spanning aerospace, energy, agriculture and
health. I served in senior roles in Boeing's Phantom Works and
several successful startups. Since 2014 I have led iSelect the
venture fund focused on the theme, Food is health, investing in
more than 70 AgTech and health tech startups. Over those 10
years, we have also met with more than 5,000 entrepreneurs and
this is what we have learned.
The U.S. spends 1.7 trillion on food and 1.9 trillion on
the healthcare cost of poor nutrition. Type 2 diabetes kills
283 Americans every day. Goldman Sachs has concluded that the
U.S. GDP would grow 1 percent annually if we cured obesity. In
2000, the U.S. sequenced the human genome launching companies
with breakthroughs in immunotherapy and vaccines, reshaping
treatments in healthcare. But we still have a problem that can
be solved with similar thinking.
For 350,000 years, humans were thin. In the last 50 years,
we're fat and diabetic. Innovation is stepping in. In the near
future, grocery stores will offer seamless access to a
nutritional coaching to get you better food, through medically
tailored meals or natural low cost forms of Ozempic.
You eat what you enjoy, and what you enjoy is better and
affordable. Your calorie intake is 25 percent less than your
parents, 45 percent less from processed food. You lose weight
and gain muscle mass. Regenerative vegetables, frozen or fresh
are tasty nutrient dense and affordable. Beef managed on
grasslands with virtual fences, are net carbon positive,
deliver balanced omega-3s and omega-6s, in reducing clogged
arteries.
Processed foods are sweet and tasty, but zero diabetic
impact, made with healthy sugars from agricultural waste.
Prebiotics fuel your gut microbiome; you sleep better and you
have less depression. Medical care is now functional medicine
for stalling disease, easily accessed. Health data is part of
the grocery store mobile apps. The app knows your genome, your
blood work, your blood pressure, and the food you purchase.
Integrated into your health insurance, reminding you of quality
choices.
Everyone gets the standard of care. Comorbidities are a
distant memory. Your health data is protected by the
blockchain, anonymized, integrated into synthetic control arm
models, comparing your genetics and health to peer groups,
improving the work at FDA. Inspired by the original Human
genome Project Innovation is driven by the Human Microbiome
Project, the Human Nutrition Project, the Soil Microbiome
Project, all working to improve the quality of the data we use
for our science.
Not all crops are healthy. Their nutrients vary. In field
spectroscopy reveal their array of nutrients and meat, fish,
vegetables and grains form nutritional quality control,
empowering farmers, ranchers, CPGs and processors to optimize
nutrient density and cost. Product labels are accurate and
complete.
Startups use AI to scan every journal and historical
artifact to find natural solutions that improve health. Testing
thousands of natural products against digital twin of human
nutrition and billions of configurations and speeding the
development of new technology. Replacing an array of
pharmaceuticals with quality nutrients.
Farmers have transitioned to biologics that rebuild the
soil microbiome improving crop nutrient intake crops are robust
against disease, drought and weeds. UVs use precision sprayers
and lasers to reduce chemicals, improving farmer profits,
increasing yield and safer food. These technologies are all
real. They all exist today. Some are controversial, some more
affordable, but more than enough to reduce the healthcare costs
of poor nutrition.
American entrepreneurs in agriculture, food and health
working with FDA, USDA, NIH, and other NGO's, can solve this
problem, lowering cost, improving sustainability, increasing
longevity, and driving GDP growth. Thank you.

prepared statement of carter williams
Introduction
Chairman Markey, Ranking Member Marshall, and distinguished Members
of the Subcommittee, it is my pleasure to appear before you today to
discuss the innovations that are transforming healthcare and addressing
the costs of poor nutrition. Across the country, 1000's of
entrepreneurs are working on the agriculture, food and health
innovations that will reduce the health-related costs of poor
nutrition, improving longevity, and increasing the United States'
competitive advantage. Their work is central to the country's effort to
improve nutrition for every aspect of our society. Achieving this
promise will require innovation, policy, and regulatory coordination to
accelerate the opportunity.
My name is Carter Williams. I am managing director and CEO of the
iSelect Fund. I have spent my entire career developing and implementing
technology. An engineer by training, I did my graduate work at MIT
concentrating on innovation, R and D and system dynamics. My first job
was on the shop floor working on F/A-18s at McDonnell Douglas in St.
Louis. I spent 15 years at Boeing in aerospace and defense in Phantom
Works, where we worked on very complex engineering efforts designed to
protect the Nation 10-20 years into the future. While at Boeing, I
managed the technology strategy for more than $2.5B in annual R and D
investment. In 2004, I entered the realm of startups, successfully
developing one of the first internet of things (IoT) frameworks for
building energy management, reducing energy usage by 20 percent with
software. That company was ultimately bought by Johnson Controls. With
deep practical experience driving innovation in companies large and
small, I decided to dedicate my efforts to accelerating innovation
across the economy. Since 2014, I have led a venture fund that has met
with more than 5,000 entrepreneurs and backed more than 70 AgTech and
HealthTech startups. Meeting that many entrepreneurs of all different
forms has taught me a lot about what is possible.
My practical expertise is to look out 20+ years and marshal the
forces of innovation to solve tough problems. Problems too hard to
solve with one answer, but solvable when you leverage the innovation of
100's of startups focused against a common objective.
Innovation
Innovation is the creation of new businesses and systems to satisfy
customer needs. Innovation does not invent; it adapts technology to
build better and less expensive products. Great innovation makes our
lives simpler and better in ways we did not know possible the moment
before.
In a sense we have seen this happen already in computers. In 1980,
I tried to persuade my father to buy an IBM PC, arguing it could help
balance his checkbook. He demurred. He ultimately became an active
power user of computers, for work. He died of a sudden heart attack in
1998. Now, I can buy a $99 device linked to my mobile phone to take my
own EKG. I can order my own labs at Quest, for cholesterol, but also
for inflammation markers. My watch reports my resting heart rate and
hours of sleep. I have a record of my time series heart rate for every
bike ride since 2009. I have a low-cost automatic defibrillator in my
home. Each product is better and cheaper than the alternative.
We need to do many things to eliminate the healthcare cost of poor
nutrition. Some policy, some regulatory, and some innovation. Near term
we need to intervene with medically tailored meals. \1\ Long term we
need to improve nutrition.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Medically Tailored Meals Could Save U.S. Nearly $13.6B Per
Year https://nutrition.tufts.edu/news/medically-tailored-meals-could-
save-us-nearly-136b-year.
I am told you cannot eliminate the healthcare cost of poor
nutrition because you can't change people's behavior. As if behavior
does not change. We changed our behavior with mobile phones. We went
from healthy diets to poor diets. We stopped smoking. We drink less
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
alcohol.
The simplest way to change people's behavior is to build a better
product. 60 percent of people today make their decisions based on
price. If entrepreneurs develop food that is tasty, nutritious, and
affordable, behavior will change. Easy to say, hard to do. We live in a
large, complex commodity system.
Food and Health are a system, \2\ driven by market forces. It needs
to serve everyone. Many things will change, but frankly many things
have changed before. The world has driven large changes. Looking at the
efforts of 1000's of startups we see a new food system emerging that we
call ``System C''. Built on the foundation of the existing food
systems:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ History of modern nutrition science--implications for current
research, dietary guidelines, and food policy https://www.bmj.com/
content/361/bmj.k2392.
System A--Tasty and Nutritious: Our original food system. The
garden of Eden so to speak. Tasty and nutritious. It works when
there are two humans, but it does not scale to 8.5B. Built on
4.5B years of evolution. System A is still available to the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
wealthiest in society, and selectively in some cultures.
System B--Scalable and Cheap: 19M people died of famine in
World War 2. \3\ We sought to scale calories globally. We
started the green revolution, monoculture, UNICEFs, the World
Food Program, and launched global scale. It delivered calories,
removed famine as a tool of war, and extended life, but
increased diabetes. 3B people remain under nourished.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Famines, Our World in Data https://ourworldindata.org/famines.
System C--Tasty, Nutritious, and Affordable: The system we now
seek takes the best of A and B to create a new system built on
modern nutrition science, that is tasty and nutritious, but
affordable and scalable. In one part fresh, but also low-cost
forms that deliver quality nutrition without causing additional
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
health problems.
It took 4.5B years to build system A, then 60 years to scale System
B. We are now 10 years into building System C.
Background
In the U.S. we spend about $1.7T on food, and $1.9T on the
healthcare cost of poor nutrition. The number is $14T globally. Type 2
diabetes kills 283 Americans every day. \4\ A recent Goldman Sachs
study \5\ found that U.S. GDP would be 1 percent higher per year if we
cured obesity.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Statistics About Diabetes: https://diabetes.org/about-
diabetes/statistics/about-diabetes.
\5\ Obesity drugs are among health breakthroughs forecast to boost
GDP, https://www.goldmansachs.com/intelligence/pages/obesity-drugs-are-
among-breakthroughs-forecast-GDP.html.
Despite 350K years of human evolution, and all our innovations in
healthcare, the healthcare cost of poor nutrition continues to weaken
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
our economy, burden our communities, and shorten lives.
At the end of World War II, the U.S. decided to end global
starvation, leading to the green revolution. \6\ Farms went from
producing 20 bushels of corn per acre to more than 173 bushels today.
We saw similar gains in livestock and fresh vegetables, fruits, and
nuts. In 2010, global agriculture with American technology ended the
calorie famine. A combination of U.S. innovation, science, policy and
farmers, led by the U.S. but implemented globally, changed global
production.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ The Green Revolution: Norman Borlaug and the Race to Fight
Global Hunger https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/americanexperience/features/
green-revolution-norman-borlaug-race-to-fight-global-hunger/.
Our collective focus on yield and calories is now not enough. 3B
people remain under-nourished today. People who would have died of
starvation now live long enough to die of diabetes, cardiovascular
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
disease, and cancer.
In 2000, the U.S. sequenced the human genome. That launched 1000's
of new companies and created solutions for immunotherapy, vaccines,
heart disease, blindness, and more. The world followed U.S. leadership
to create a global shift in healthcare.
We have the same opportunity today in nutrition. The same sort of
foundation that led to discoveries in the human genome can lead to a
world where food is understood to be synonymous with health. With all
our efforts in nutrition, we still do not really understand whether a
ketogenic diet is good or bad. With all our efforts in agriculture, we
still are unsure of the ideal balance of microbes, genetics, and
fertilizers. We have come a long way, but we can do better.
A Future Vision of Health
Sometime in the future, you will walk into a grocery store. You may
be pre-diabetic, obese, have cancer, or seek to run a marathon. But the
experience will be different than it is today.
By then we will live in the realm of System C. You will have
seamless access to a nutritionist nudging you as you shift your
behavior. Maybe a clinical intervention like medically tailored meals
\7\ or a nutraceutical form of Ozempic. You still eat what you enjoy,
but what you enjoy is now better for you. Your calorie intake is 25
percent less than your parents', and 45 percent less of those calories
come from ultra-processed foods. Less fat, and more lean muscle mass
without going to the gym every day. Co-morbidities are a rare medical
burden.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Eatwell Meal Kits--https://www.eatwellmealkits.com/.
The vegetables, frozen or fresh, are nutrient dense, boosting
vitamins and micronutrients. A product of regenerative agriculture. The
grass-fed beef, net carbon positive, managed on grass lands with
virtual fences, \8\ deliver better taste and balanced omega 3/6,
reducing vascular inflammation. The processed foods are sweet and
tasty, but zero glycemic impact. \9\ Full of prebiotics, fueling your
gut microbiome. The center of the store offers packaged bioactives \10\
for those genetically at risk of diabetes, leaky gut, high blood
pressure, or cholesterol. Your microbiome \11\ is back in balance. You
sleep better, are less depressed, and enjoy life without medical fears.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Vence https://www.merck-animal-health-usa.com/species/cattle/
vence.
\9\ Bonumose, Inc.--healthy sugar for the mass market: https://
bonumose.com/.
\10\ Bright Seed https://www.brightseedbio.com/.
\11\ Meet the Psychobiome: https://www.science.org/content/
article/meet-psychobiome-gut-bacteria-may-alter-how-you-think-feel-and-
act.
It all seems fanciful. It was slow at first, then things happened
all at once, because innovation, policy and regulations found the way
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
to reduce the healthcare cost of poor nutrition.
Medical care moved from sick care to functional medicine, \12\
forestalling disease. Medical software applications became part of the
grocery store mobile apps. It is your data, not theirs. The app knows
your health history, it tracks your purchases, it recommends products.
It is integrated into your health insurance. \13\ It nudges you with
recipes, reminds you of a higher quality pasta, or offers a protein
dense gluten free bread.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ https://www.functionhealth.com/.
\13\ Uber and Instacart expand their health plan partnerships
https://endpts.com/uber-and-instacart-expand-their-health-plan-
partnerships/.
The software runs on deep analytics and AI. Your DNA is sequenced,
covered by the grocery store because you are a loyal customer. Your
health data is protected by the blockchain, allowing integration into a
synthetic control arm model comparing your genetics and health to peer
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
groups based on race, age and social determinants.
Inspired by the original human genome project, we now have data
from The Human Microbiome Project, The Human Nutrition Project, and The
Soil Microbiome Project. Each built by government, academia, and
industry as a foundational, science-backed model guiding health. This
foundational data is integrated into Health Shift, \14\ a comprehensive
human synthetic control arm built from the health data of 1M people who
have donated their data to science.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/healthshift-empowering-people-
transforming-healthcare-carter-williams.
Other commercial software data systems gather blood tests,
radiology, and new assays. The data base continues \15\ to grow, to
train the AI systems that lead to new medical discoveries, new health
treatments, new understanding of nutrition, and rapidly adapting
regulatory frameworks. Monitored over decades, these longitudinal data
sets capture, as one example, the correlation between childhood viruses
and late-stage health conditions like MS and Alzheimer's.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ https://flywheel.io/.
We understand the nutritional value of the food in the grocery
store because we now use a real-time, low-cost spectroscopy assay that
determines the macro and micro-nutrients in meat, fish, vegetables, and
grains. \16\ Over time this reveals the wide variability in nutrition,
from sweet potatoes to beef. Farmers, ranchers, CPGs, processors, and
others realize the variability and implications, improving quality in
production. Consumer labels accurately represent nutritional quality.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ https://www.edacious.com/.
Bioactive innovators have built computational models of human
nutrition. \17\ The models determine the metabolic effect of a nutrient
on human health. They use AI to scan every journal, story, and
historical artifact to find natural solutions that improve health. They
take 1000's of natural ingredients and test their benefit, in billions
of configurations, to find the key ingredients that improve health.
They convert these discoveries into products, integrated into processed
foods or standalone supplements to improve individual health.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ https://agfundernews.com/meet-the-founder-brightseeds-dr-jim-
flatt-illuminates-the-dark-matter-of-nutrition.
Precision fermentation is used to develop new ingredients from food
waste. These new products replace animal collagen in food, \18\ or
protein in animal feed. \19\ We have new sugars that offer sweetness
with low glycemic impact, a direct replacement for sugar without the
danger of diabetes. \20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ https://geltor.com/.
\19\ https://www.bondpets.com/ https://bensonhill.com/.
\20\ https://bonumose.com/.
Livestock feeding operations are more efficient with software \21\
that assure animal husbandry, improves nutrition efficiency, and manage
operations to minimize and reverse carbon footprint. Protein dense soy
and improved feed conversion ratios reduce the cost of protein in human
diets and eliminate the need for antibiotics.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ Livestock Management Software https://www.agriwebb.com/.
Crop genetics companies apply deep learning and computational
intensity to reveal every genetic trait. \22\ For decades, improvements
in yield reduced taste and nutrition. Now we have the engineering tools
to breed crops that improve yield, taste, and nutrition. Corn, soy,
wheat and 100's of other crops, all with better quality at a lower
cost.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ CropOS Technology Platform https://player.vimeo.com/video/
534843655.
After deep research into the soil microbiome, farmers have
transitioned to biologics that create a consortium of microbes in the
soil. \23\ These microbes improve crop nutrient intake. They naturally
fixate nitrogen from the air to feed the crops. \24\ Our command of the
soil microbiome improves crop nutritional density, making crops robust
against disease, drought, weeds, and heat.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ https://www.holganix.com/ https://www.plutonbio.com/.
\24\ https://kulabio.com/ https://www.pivotbio.com/.
Autonomous systems using precision spraying, lasers \25\ and
mechanical means care for the crops through the season, augmented with
biologic-based herbicides. \26\ Limiting the application of chemicals
to precise applications. The advances in biologics reduce production
costs dramatically. These new tools for soil health are validated with
ground penetrating radar, \27\ imagery, and other sensor systems to
train AI models and validate climate and nutritional gains. Financial
services, in the form of insets, \28\ allow Consumer Package Goods
companies to offer price premiums for better nutrition.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ https://carbonrobotics.com/.
\26\ https://harpebio.com/.
\27\ https://earthoptics.com/.
\28\ https://arvaintelligence.com/.
Protein engineering, built on breakthroughs like protein folding,
develops peptides that protect food and crops from pests. These
biologic solutions decay naturally. The rapid design tools allow for
seasonal solutions. The approach is integrated with EPAs safety
systems, to assure fast engineering of nature-based solutions to
protect crops and reduce the cost of crop loss.
Recommendations
The technology listed above is all real. These are all emerging
companies we and other investors are supporting today. With increased
interest rates, venture investing is today at an all-time low, but the
ecosystem will adapt, building even stronger companies. The work
happening now around medically tailored meals is vitally important in
the immediate term, while the innovations outlined above will become
commercially successful over the coming years, reducing the need for
such meals in time. We do need to think about two key pillars to match
these entrepreneurial efforts:
1. We spent $1B in R and D to unlock the human genome. Industry
and government need to set a plan, in the context of today's
AI, to do the same in Soil Health, Human Microbiome, and
Nutrition Science.
2. The FDA, USDA and EPA need room to rethink how they regulate
safety. Using big data and synthetic control arms to speed
solutions and stop harms.
We need to do 1,000 different things well. Which will happen. Our
economy is perfectly suited to advance society and technology to
improve nutrition better and faster than expected. But we do need to
decide to take the steps necessary to eliminate the healthcare cost of
poor nutrition, as a national mission, like we did to end famine.
``If you want to build a ship, don't drum up the men to gather
wood, divide the work, and give orders. Instead, teach them to
yearn for the vast and endless sea.''
-Antoine de Saint-Exupery.
Conclusion
Looking back to this day, to this room, we will come to see our
shift in focus to eliminate the healthcare cost of poor nutrition as a
joint mission aligning policy, innovation, research and NGO's. When we
are done, the healthcare cost of poor nutrition will be $0. This will
happen as we build System C. We will increase the scientific
understanding of the human microbiome, human nutrition, soil
microbiome, and crop science. Our regulations will adapt to advanced
food, bio-actives, and nutraceuticals. The speed of entrepreneurs and
innovation will step in, delivering more than expected, better quality
products, at a lower cost to society and individually.
Looking ahead, this seems hard but the reality is the net effect of
science, regulation and innovation will eliminate the healthcare cost
of poor nutrition, increase longevity, improve productivity, and make
life better.
Addendum
There are 1000's of companies developing innovations to reduce the
healthcare cost of poor nutrition. These are a few of those companies
that inspire the content of this testimony. Many come from our
portfolio. Not all of these will succeed. They do represent examples of
the innovation in progress.
1. EatWell Meal Kits--Food as medicine meal kits, education,
and analytics to address food insecurity and reduce costs for
insurers (https://www.eatwellmealkits.com/.)
2. Vence--virtual fence for livestock management that enables
the scaling of the sustainable production of grass fed and
pasture raised livestock (https://www.merck-animal-health-
usa.com/species/cattle/vence.)
3. Bonumose--commercializing low-glycemic index, natural sugars
through a proprietary, cost-effective enzymatic process
(https://bonumose.com/.)
4. Brightseed--AI powered nutrition discovery company that
identifies unique micronutrients in the plant kingdom and maps
them to specific human health conditions where they can have
the highest impact (https://www.brightseedbio.com/.)
5. Holobiome--platform for microbiome-based therapeutics to
treat diseases of the central and enteric nervous systems
(https://holobiome.org/.)
6. Function Health--Developed by Mark Hyman, a blood testing
platform that pairs you with a doctor for review of key blood
analytes twice a year. (https://www.functionhealth.com/.)
7. Noom--Easy nutrition tracking with recommendations (https://
www.noom.com/.)
8. Flywheel--research workflow solution that provides cloud-
scale data management and computational analysis (https://
flywheel.io/.)
9. Edacious--accessible low cost nutritional measurement using
a suite of spectroscopy tools for the agrifood supply chain
(https://www.edacious.com/.)
10. Geltor--platform technology that enables it to cost
effectively produce sustainable and beneficial proteins for the
cosmetic, food, beverage, nutritional supplement, and
healthcare industries (https://geltor.com/.)
11. Bond Pet Foods--Using precision fermentation to manufacture
animal cells without the animal (https://www.bondpets.com/.)
12. Bonumose--commercializing low-glycemic index, natural
sugars through a proprietary, cost-effective enzymatic process
(https://bonumose.com/.)
13. Agriwebb--building the digital backbone of the livestock
industry, connecting animal and land management to the supply
chain and the consumer (https://www.agriwebb.com/.)
14. Benson Hill--combines machine learning and big data with
genome editing and plant biology to accelerate the product
development process (https://bensonhill.com/.)
15. Vestaron--biological crop protection products that address
resistance and safety/ environmental externalities (https://
www.vestaron.com/.)
16. Kula Bio--nitrogen fixing microbe that replaces 50-80
percent of applied nitrogen at or below the cost of synthetic
nitrogen (https://kulabio.com/.)
17. Autonomous Pivot--noninvasive soil/crop sensor network that
feeds AI decision support engine for autonomous irrigation,
fertigation, and crop protection (https://
www.autonomouspivot.com/.)
18. Harpe Bio--natural, sustainable, biological weed control
solutions (https://harpebio.com/.)
19. EarthOptics--measurement and modeling of key soil
attributes (https://earthoptics.com/.)
20. Arva Intelligence--provides carbon insetting and offsetting
solutions by connecting growers to buyers in the carbon markets
(https://arvaintelligence.com/.)
______
Senator Markey. Thank you very much. And now we'll turn to
questions from the Subcommittee.
The Older American Act includes essential nutrition
programs for older adults, including meals at congregate sites
like senior centers, or delivered to their homes. As a member
of the working group to reauthorize this law, I remain
committed to this sacred responsibility. Ms. Martin, can you
elaborate on how Food is Medicine can be incorporated into the
Older Americans Act?
Ms. Martin. Yes, thank you. I think that these federally
Qualified Health Centers, Rural Health Centers and other
congregate meal programs would be drastically enhanced and
produced incredible health outcomes by being integrated in
those systems.
Senator Markey. Okay. And can you discuss how pilot
projects in the Old Americans Act could demonstrate the
benefits of integrating medically tailored meals or
Prescription Food Programs for older Americans?
Ms. Martin. Yes, and we see old--most of the people we
serve actually are over 50 and experiencing these outcomes
consistently. There is a federally Qualified Health Center that
has a diabetic program. They offer some food bank boxes, but we
also get referrals because we really enhance that program from
that federally Qualified Health Center. So we believe that
having it more integrated in that system would be way more
beneficial for the older Americans.
Senator Markey. This is such a great bipartisan issue.
You're not often going to have the Democratic witness from
Oklahoma and the Republican witness from Massachusetts case, so
the recombinant political DNA here shows that many things are
possible.

Senator Markey. Ms. Terranova, you have served as the
principal investigator for two large scale NIH studies
examining the impacts of Community Servings meals on health
outcomes. Why is investment in NIH for research like this so
important?
Ms. Terranova. Well, thank you Senator. It's really
critical.
Senator Markey. Could you turn on your microphone please?
Ms. Terranova. Thank you. Yes, it's really critical because
policy leaders are feeling that there is a gap in research and
particularly in communities such as rural communities.
Community Servings, as you know has published five peer
reviewed journal articles on the impacts of medically tailored
meals on health outcomes and healthcare costs. And there have
been other studies that were also cited in the Aspen Institutes
recently updated report on Food is Medicine. But there still do
exist gaps and in particular in multi-site settings, in rural
settings and for specific Populations. And so, investing in
research for NIH is really critical to addressing these gaps.
Senator Markey. Okay. So, Dr. Mozaffarian, what further
research in your opinion, needs to be done on this subject?
Dr. Mozaffarian. I think there's a lot of questions, like
anything in medicine, right? We know enough to get going and do
things now, but we also need more research. I really like the
NIH concept of these Food is Medicine Centers of Excellence
that's built on the Cancer Centers of Excellence model.
I think in the 1960's, the NIH launched these Cancer
Centers of Excellence--maybe later, I'll have to check the
date, but now almost every state has one. And these Centers of
Excellence integrate patient care with research, with community
outreach, and with education.
I think having these hubs of knowledge generate in regions
across the country would be really important. There are
questions we need to ask, what's the right dose? Is it $50, is
it $100? How important is sharing with the family. If the
family's bigger, how much more food do you have to give? What
should the duration of the program be? Some people may need
these programs for just a few weeks, some people may need it
for a few months. And like other things in medicine, some
people may need it for their whole life, and we have to
understand that.
I think those are all really critical questions that need
to be answered with better research. That could be done by NIH,
it could be done by USDA, it could be done directly through
CMMI and Medicaid.
Senator Markey. Dr. Mozaffarian, how do you think the cost
savings in Food is Medicine Programs relative to the growth of
expensive medications like Ozempic that are used to treat
diabetes and weight loss?
Dr. Mozaffarian. One of the dirty secrets of healthcare is
almost nothing saves money. If it did, we wouldn't have a $4.3
trillion healthcare system. And so, blood pressure screening
control, cancer screening control, cholesterol screening
control, none of those things save money. They cost money. We
get a good buy for the dollars we spend, but they cost money.
Food is Medicine is exciting because for the right
patients, particularly very sick patients who receive medically
tailored meals or produce prescriptions, the research suggests
we might actually save money, net of the program. So I think
that's really exciting. I don't think they'll save money in
every case. I think there'll be other cases where it'll be a
good buy, just like giving a generic cholesterol lowering drug
is a good buy. So, we shouldn't expect cost savings in every
case.
think this is a really exciting area. And compared to GLP-
1s, which Senator Sanders produced a report this week out of
the HELP Committee, that if half of Americans eligible for the
drug went on the drug, we would double our national pharmacy
spend on all prescription drugs combined.
We just can't afford those drugs, as effective as they are.
And so, we need to integrate nutrition and Food is Medicine and
lifestyle together with GLP-1 to be able to mitigate that cost.
Senator Markey. Okay. Thank you.
Senator Marshall.
Senator Marshall. I'll defer to Senator Braun.
Senator Braun. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member. I
ran a company for 37 years prior to coming here, and I remember
in 2008 how it got to a point where our health insurance
premiums were going up to where we were lucky, it was only 5 to
10 percent. That was a line I'd get every year. It got to a
point where I couldn't raise deductibles anymore, couldn't
change underwriters any more often.
Had to look and the insurance companies basically told me,
they said, we are a system of expensive remediation, and we pay
no attention to wellness and prevention. That sounded kind of
philosophical.
Then I dug into how that was going to work for me to lower
costs and have healthier outcomes. Well, we did that all-in-one
day. I took their advice created healthcare consumers out of
all my employees to where they watch what they eat. We give
them every tool to do that and we have not had premium
increases now in 16 years.
A lot of it is watching what you eat, because the foods
that are the worst for you generally got the most calories in
them. And then you've got to work hard to shed the bare weight
that you accumulate, and then you're not necessarily replacing
it with good wholesome foods.
My question will start with Mr. Williams. I'd like each
witness to give me your opinion. How did we get here? How much
of it is a system of healthcare that they don't even give much
study to nutrition. It is an expensive business of remediation.
Then about our food supply production, which is more on
processed foods as opposed to wholesome ones. I'd like to know
who's more at fault when we really know that you should be
eating better? Is it the healthcare industry that's not being
voiceful enough, or is it big food processing that gives us
generally many foods that just aren't nutritious for you?
Mr. Williams. It's a lot in there.

Senator Braun. Yes, there is.
Mr. Williams. I think from an economic standpoint it's
notable that at the end of World War II we said we don't like
famine, and we've got to boost calorie production. And we set
down the path to the Green Revolution really to stop worldwide
famine. American innovation drove the cost down of those
calories. Those calories tended to be, for various reasons,
cheap, low nutrition calories. And that sort of set this up.
I think that same level of innovation with a different
focus around nutrient density can change the food system itself
so that when you go to the grocery store, those kinds of
calories have been moved around a little bit.
There's a lot more in there, but the basic food is moving
too nutrient dense, as Erin is working with, when she uses
regenerative crops, people like them better, they taste better
and they lead to an improvement. So the technology's moving in
that direction.
I think a challenge for healthcare is, over time,
healthcare has been maybe more about healthcare, not about
making people. Well, I think the movements by Dr. Hyman around
areas like functional medicine in terms of getting in before
you get sick are big shifts and we're seeing that kind of new
care delivery mechanism. It's unclear how to pay for it
correctly. But when we take some of these solutions into the
healthcare community, our entrepreneurs find it's very
difficult to get them properly covered. You get into the morass
of everything.
Dr. Mozaffarian. I want to agree with what Carter said
about how we got here. And I would add the evidence vitamin
deficiency diseases were rampant in this country in the 1920's
and 1930's, disease like pellagra and rickets and all these
diseases.
In addition to the concern about getting enough calories
for a booming world population, there was concern about vitamin
deficiency diseases. So, when you walk down the cereal aisle
today, and you see starchy inexpensive calories from monocrop,
crops fortified with vitamins, that was a conscious creation of
meeting the two scientific goals of the 20th century.
There were no villains in that original goal, right? This
was a very positive goal, and we did it. We probably prevented
a billion people from starving, and we essentially eliminated
vitamin deficiency diseases in most countries in the world. But
we created unintentionally this hyper processed, very mono
cropped food culture that has made us metabolically sick.
It's that same mix of what got us here in the 20th century,
we can now use to go to the next phase, which is to combine
government policy with private sector innovation with the best
science, and we can do all that together and, and move forward.
Senator Braun. Before I run Out of time let's move down the
line. Ms. Martin.
Ms. Martin. Thank you. I think it's definitely a
combination of both. I think having local and fresh food is
really important because when it's being shipped from long
distances, it's prematurely picked and artificially ripened.
And by the time it's in somebody's kitchen, it's very devoid of
a lot of the nutrients. So having local food systems to support
this Food is Medicine Programs, I think are vital.
Then on the healthcare side, when we are enrolling these
participants who, like I said, have had type 2 diabetes for a
decade, we tell them that food, what all problems are you
having? Oh, pain, depression, diabetes, all these other issues.
Food could actually fix all that. And it's the first time that
they're hearing about this. So a combination of both. Thank
you.
Ms. Terranova. Senator, I will just say, with respect to
the medically tailored meal intervention, we have a dual focus
that specifically address marginalized communities that for
people who experience both food insecurity and diet related
illness.
We are not talking about people who are in a job, who can
prevent their disease necessarily through food. We are talking
about people who have cancer, HIV, diabetes, very critical
illnesses, the 5 percent of people who are accounting for 50
percent of healthcare costs.
We're really in the business, I suppose, at Community
Servings and within the Food is Medicine Coalition of
addressing these illnesses as a treatment as opposed to really
a prevention.
Senator Braun. Thank you so much. I'll note that when we
started producing food that had a lot of vitamins and kind of
empty calories, that's when the healthcare industry really
started to shoot up, which is now the biggest industry in our
Country, nearing 20 percent of our GDP. Thank you.
Senator Markey. Senator Smith from Minnesota.
Senator Smith. Thank you so much. Senator Markey, and
Senator Marshall, thanks to our panelists also for being here.
This is super interesting. So, you all are describing a
healthcare system where costs are going up dramatically, at the
same time that poor health is increasing, and food, which
arguably has the biggest impact on good health and is the
biggest cause of poor health, is sort of like knocking on the
door of this system saying, let me in, I can be a part of the
solution here.
I think it's also true--I think you were alluding to this a
little bit Dr. Mozaffarian, that at the same time that this
system is functioning so poorly, you have some big companies
that are making a lot of money off of it, insurance companies,
big food companies that are making a ton of money off of
selling unhealthy food.
I think that bears understanding as we try to figure out
what to do here. There's so much that we could talk about, the
research side of it, the side about developing products and
therapies, and then the kind of the utilization side, the
adoption piece of it, how do you get these products and
therapies adopted?
I want to actually focus on that a little bit as we think
about what we can do in Congress to support this. Maybe I'll
start with Ms. Terranova and Ms. Martin. Could you talk a
little bit, just like hone in on one thing, I think, we know
that we can get--we're getting better adoption when you have
medically tailored meals compared to a specialized dietary
plan.
I think I read that, I'm not sure if that's true, but could
you just tell us if there's anything we can learn from those
two products or therapies about how we can increase utilization
or adoption by patients or consumers?
Ms. Terranova. I think Senator, that it really gets to the
question of what is a medically tailored meal, and how are we
defining it? And it's really important that there be uniformity
and agreement around the standards and definitions and the
National Food Is Medicine Coalition has just released an
accreditation criteria and requirement that standardizes what
is this intervention?
It was developed by a committee of registered dietician
nutritionists. And this is the model that has really been
tested in the research that we've published. And so, it's just
very important that we all come to a consensus on what is a
meal, how many meals a week, what is the proportion----
Senator Smith. You're all talking the same language, what
it is that you are prescribing or what the therapy--I'm using
the kind of medical terms here. Ms. Martin, how do you see the
issue of getting improved adoption or utilization for, say
we've agreed on what the therapy should be?
Ms. Martin. From the studies that I've read and how we've
enacted this program is that, I think the best results come
from programs that are a hybrid model and having both education
and food. And we really curate the food offerings that we
provide. And so, I think having these very well-defined
programs and accredited education that they're going through,
like just, just delivering food yes has impact, but really
empowering people to have the knowledge to continue those
behavioral changes.
Senator Smith. In my home State of Minnesota, we have many
East African immigrants, we have many Latino people, we have
many Hmong people. We have many Swedish people. Everybody's
cultures and food are quite different. How do you consider
people's cultural preferences and their culture, broadly
speaking, as you think about what that medicine, what that food
is, that they're getting?
Ms. Martin. That's a great question. So the majority of
people that we serve are from the Black community and
indigenous, and we ask them what they would like. And no
farmers at that time were growing collard greens. And so, we
commissioned the farmers to grow collard greens, and now we
have more collard greens than we know what to do with.
We're asking the people, and we also hire people from the
community that reflect those that we serve. And we are asking
for that input. We give a survey that says, what food do you
like? What do you not like? What kind of indigenous varieties
of food? And we also look for growers that reflect that. So we
have home growers, Black growers.
Senator Smith. Integrated system.
Ms. Martin. Absolutely. Yep. Building a community.
Senator Smith. Right. Mr. Williams, before I ever was a
senator, I worked for General Mills, and I was a marketing
person. And so, as I'm thinking about you working on you, what
you do from a venture capital perspective, a business
perspective, how do you see this question of implementation or
kind of utilization or uptake? I mean, in marketing language,
you'd be talking about how you get trial. Yes.
Mr. Williams. When you're dealing with an entrepreneur,
you're trying to get customers to adopt the product.
Senator Smith. Right.
Mr. Williams. The main thing here is everybody wants to be
healthier, and you really have to build a product that's so
much better in a sense that people adopt it despite the
friction.
In many ways, what Erin's doing, she is doing that in the
community. Most of the patients that she deals with had no idea
that they could feel better if they ate better, a very basic
thing.
From the standpoint of the way we see it, I would say that
it's the people who will compete against General Mills
introducing products that do meet the needs of consumers who
want to be healthier, and that you're getting into that part of
their psychology and that they adopt it and that General Mills
follows in time.
I'll say that the Ozempic is driving processed food demand
down by about 45 percent in certain patient populations. The
cost of Ozempic is going down. So there, if that gets bigger,
General Mills of the world are going to be under a lot of
challenge.
General Mills has been focused on sort of value engineering
product to lower cost. They're going to start running into some
challenges where they got to think differently about how they
design the products. So they've got a lot of challenges to
face.
Senator Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I've gone over my
time. Appreciate very much.
Senator Markey. I'll just say that when I was a boy
watching Superman, and all of a sudden, I'm told that if I can
send three box tops from Frosted Flakes, this new product that
they had Tony to Tiger, I would get a Superman t-shirt at home.
And so, we were moving from Corn Flakes and Cheerios and Pep to
Frosted Flakes, and I got a Superman t-shirt. So they knew what
they were doing in marketing for sure. And that t-shirt, by the
way, completely shrunk in the first wash. So I learned about
consumer rip-offs, immediately.

Senator Markey. Senator Hickenlooper from Colorado.
Senator Hickenlooper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank
all of you for being here. I appreciate your time and all your
effort here. Community health centers have consistently led the
way in a lot of the efforts around this. Colorado has a group
of community health centers called Peak Vista Community Health
Center, and they partner with Care and Share Food Bank.
They serve 29 counties in southern Colorado, it's almost
half the size of the state. They've got a number of events
where Care and Share will show up with a tractor trailer full
of food and they will demolish it. These are things like back-
to-school events or school physicals.
Ms. Terranova, what role have you seen in terms of
community health centers within Food is Medicine and how can we
implement a model like that outside of, beyond community health
centers?
Ms. Terranova. Community health centers really do play a
vital role in both innovation as well as in continuity of
programs that exist. Community health centers are really key
referral partners for our medically tailored home-delivered
meal programs.
As you said, they can also offer pantry and programs right
onsite and our trusted advisors for the patients that they
serve. So they can play really a critical role in maintaining
and continuing these programs.
Senator Hickenlooper. Right. And I think it is amazing. I
am a lifetime lover of sweet things. I was in the brew pub
business for a long time, so I've learned the hard way that
moderation is the choice here, in a lot of these things that
genetically, for various reasons, are inclined toward things
that aren't necessarily good for us.
I guess I was going to--we have a company in Colorado
called Virta that actually provides coaches. It uses
technology, keeps records, monitors glucose and other easily
traceable biologic indicators, allows people to every day be
conscious of what they're eating and allows them to eat things
in moderation. Maybe not as much as they did before, but at
least in some cases, matches Ozempic.
Without their supervision, I actually got to the point
where I was pre-diabetic a year ago. And so, I basically almost
quit sugar completely as close as I could come and dramatically
reduced my alcohol consumption. And I lost 10 percent of my
body weight in the course of 7 months. I thought I was sick,
and yet that shows how much excess is there.
In terms of how do we get this more accessible, and I
raised the question or the example of Virta, just because they
engage people, people are coaching and they're engaged they
want to solve this issue for themselves.
How do we get people to do something assuming that we've
got the resources that isn't naturally their inclination? And
obviously, the people that are very sick can resolve issues of
pain and depression, I'm not worried about that. It's those
people that are going downhill, consistently, but slowly. And I
guess let's start down at the end with Mr. Williams and then
Dr. Mozaffarian.
Mr. Williams. I think things like Verta, there are a lot of
people in the medical community that don't even realize it
works? So there is a bit of an education process of the medical
community getting a better understanding that there are other
interventions than putting somebody else----
Senator Hickenlooper. But they use no drugs. I mean,
that's, Virta uses no pharmaceuticals at all. It's all just
food and rearranging when you eat food and what food you eat in
some level of moderation.
Mr. Williams. Yes. So it's a multifaceted challenge, but I
think that one is the way doctors act, they need to learn more
about these solutions, what we're saying here on the panel,
there are doctors I think, that really don't believe that these
kinds of solutions can step in.
The second is, you'll see the first wave of things like
this, then you'll get a bandwagon effect. First one person
started using a computer, nobody else used it, then everybody
else became more obvious. We haven't got into that bandwagon
effect. And when we get to that bandwagon effect, we're going
to start seeing simpler versions of it. So we're on the pathway
to it.
I don't know if I can give you a trick to it other than to
recognize the Virta system does not scale to every 200 million
people, so we've got to move to that next level of better
information exposure to everybody else, that it's the art of
the possible. Right.
Dr. Mozaffarian. I'd add that the way I look at it, Willie
Sutton, the bank robber from the 1930's, he was arrested and
they said, why do you rob banks? He said, that's where the
money is. And so, when I look at solutions to the food system,
we've been driving toward cheaper calories, cheaper food, we
need to flip that and reward farmers, producers, consumer
packaged, good companies, retailers that are selling healthier
food through dollars that we're already spending, particularly
dollars in healthcare.
I have a vision that the Food is Medicine Movement, which
is built into healthcare, also then starts to shift the
incentives for how we produce food from the ground up. And
really just creates a virtuous cycle instead of a negative
vicious cycle, so that ultimately Americans that aren't even in
a Food is Medicine Program, they have healthier choices at the
grocery store. The cereals are better, the snack bars are
better. We need processed and packaged food. We're not going to
get rid of that, but we can make those healthier with better
science and with investment.
Right now we're pouring money down into healthcare and
taking money away from every other priority, including food. If
we put some money into food, we can start to reverse that cycle
and make food healthier for everyone.
Senator Hickenlooper. Yes, great. Ms. Martin.
Ms. Martin. I think the health coaching aspect is great.
Like, you really can get that referral from the doctor and then
have someone handhold them through that process. And that's
what the doctors love, that champion this program. They feel
like this isn't an extra shot or another pill. This is someone
who will really walk through this with you.
There's some great online shopping models for produce
prescription. One called Attane Health, that's out of Kansas
City and serving many states, and they have a health coach
model on their platform. And that's pretty much all you need.
And then you've, you've got it all fixed right there.

Senator Hickenlooper. Ms. Terranova, last word?
Ms. Terranova. Just a last word to emphasize the importance
of trusted relationships. And so, those community health
centers and organizations like ours have that trusted advisor,
the registered dietician, nutritionist, the other community
members who really play such an important role in that
coaching. Coaching is only as good as people will listen to it.
Senator Hickenlooper. That was in my mind to say, at the
very beginning as a framing element, but I appreciate that.
You're exactly right, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Markey. Yes. Thank you. And first let me ask
unanimous consent to enter into the record seven statements
outlining stakeholder Food is Medicine priorities. Without
objections, so ordered.
[The following information can be found on page 42 in
Additional Material:]
Senator Markey. I recognize Senator Marshall.
Senator Marshall. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'll start with
Mr. Williams. What obstacles exist that block us from
harnessing personalized medicine today?
Mr. Williams. I think that building on the last point, when
we look at least from a entrepreneurial standpoint, the
startups that we see, when you're a startup in this space, you
have to make a decision whether you're going to be in the CMS
lane or not.
If you're going to be in the CMS lane, then you got to
comply with how it works. And there are things I know the
entrepreneurs do that are not what they know is right for the
patient, but is right because of the structure of how CMS
works. It's not a criticism of CMS, it's they are there to deal
with sick people, not proactive.
I think that the front end on CMS and also on FDA
standpoint in terms of what is nutrition, the medical claims
that we see in the new products that have more nutritional
density that can't be made. Because when you go into FDA, it
falls into a level of approvals that make it very difficult for
an entrepreneur bringing new products to market to get through
that buzz saw.
I think both FDA and CMS and that front end, if we're
expecting stuff to come from the innovators into the space,
they need that pathway cleaned up a little bit or they got to
go to it alone and it's got to take longer.
Senator Marshall. Okay. Ms. Martin, how would you handle
the reimbursement part of this? What would you suggest that,
that we should do to better reimburse for the Food is Medicine
component?
Ms. Martin. The reimbursement should absolutely be
integrated into the healthcare model. There are about 14 states
that are either pending or have already passed 1115 waivers
that are implemented into state Medicaid. And there's already
Medicare and in Medicare Advantage programs offering this as a
reimbursable.
I would think that it would need to be a pre-authorization
for at least a year, and that would be paid upfront to cover
the food and the education.
Senator Marshall. Are you seeing with any ACOs?
Ms. Martin. I have not.
Senator Marshall. All right. Dr. Mozaffarian, we got to
talk about milk just for a second I'm kind of the champion of
whole milk up here.

Senator Marshall. Can you just speak a little bit, have you
done any research about whole milk, which by the way, tastes
better and the kids actually drink it, and we're going to have
a whole new generation of boys and girls that develop
osteopenia, osteoporosis at a much younger age. How do you feel
about whole milk and what does your research show?
Dr. Mozaffarian. I mean, one of the reasons I got into
nutrition was in the nineties when I was doing my medical
training, it was the height of the low fat diet
recommendations. And when I read the science to educate myself
as a doctor who wasn't receiving training on nutrition, the
science in the nineties didn't support a low-fat diet.
We were doing the best we could, but the science was--the
policy was 10, 20 years behind the science. And so I knew right
then that I had to really understand dietary fats. And so, I've
done a lot of research on dietary fats. And I think, although
most Americans don't realize this, the dietary guidelines have
quietly dropped the focus on low total fat. There is no longer
a focus on low total fat in the dietary guidelines, which is
appropriate.
There's still a focus on low saturated fat, which I think
is misguided and not actually supported by the evidence. And I
hope the current dietary guidelines fixes that. But what that
does is make recommendations for low fat or non-fat dairy. And
we've done research using observational studies, using
biomarker studies, using meta-analysis looking at a range of
types of studies, and there's no evidence that low fat or non-
fat dairy is healthier than whole fat dairy. There's some
evidence that whole fat dairy may be healthier than non-fat
dairy even the other way. And so, from my perspective, we don't
have enough evidence to only recommend low fat or non-fat
dairy. We should be telling people to eat what they choose, and
we need more science.
I think the second point I would make is there's more
interesting evidence about the type of dairy. And so, fermented
dairy like yogurt with probiotics or cheese, which is actually
the top fermented food consumed in the U.S. may be particularly
helpful. And so, I think we need more research on fermented
dairy foods.
Senator Marshall. Yes. And remind everybody that with the
whole milk, you can absorb the fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E,
and K. So it just makes sense to me, says she'll find pregnant
moms to let them have whole milk. Let me go back to Mr.
Williams. Talk a little bit more about regenerative crops and
nutrient dense food. What does that mean to you, and how do we
get to them and do they taste better?
Mr. Williams. Yes. So you can imagine that, evolution says
if something is more nutrient dense, you would want it to taste
better, so you remember to eat it like 200,000 years ago.
It's the case that taste and nutritional density tend to
correlate with each other in crops. What we have found is that
nutritional quality tends to come from the soil. So if you
enhance the soil microbiome, you tend to have more nutrients
available, the more nutrient uptake. Farmers are learning a lot
better how to balance both synthetic fertilizer and that the
microbiome and shifting into a mindset where regenerative is
working.
Further, what Erin has been seeing is that you can grow
those crops in amongst existing agricultural products. So
someone, a 200,000 acre row crop farmer can also put two or
three acres and work around regenerative. And then that supply
chain is more local. It can be done 10 months out of the year,
and then directly supply rural areas with more nutrient dense,
but ultimately, that nutrition comes from the soil.
Senator Marshall. Well, Mr. Chairman, I just want to say
again, thank you for letting us have this hearing. I've got to
circle back to one of the statements you made that FDR was
concerned about the malnutrition incidents in this country.
I would postulate our incidence of malnutrition today is
higher than it was in the 1940's. We have plenty of calories.
That's not what I'm talking about. But the nutrition quality of
our diet has deteriorated for a lot of reasons.
I wish I could wave my hand and fix this. This is something
I've worked on for 30 years and still struggle to find that
perfect place and congratulations to, the folks that are
finding success, doing and implementing, that's not easily
done. So congratulations to you all. Thanks, again, to all of
our participants today for your testimony.
Senator Markey. Thank you, Senator. Very much. And my
father was actually a milkman. So the one thing we got was
whole milk. Butternut margarine ice cream. My wife is a
physician and she does say that one thing that my brothers and
I don't have to worry about is osteoporosis.

Senator Markey. We were definitely fed the preventative
medicine as children. And if I may, Dr. Mozaffarian, when I was
a boy growing up with Tufts University, a mile from my house,
we had Jean Mayer writing a column and probably 200 newspapers
every week on nutrition. He became the president of Tufts
University. He died in 1993, but he was the world's leading
nutritionist. And to a certain extent that's why you were there
because of the legacy of Jean Mayer.
Could you tell us, in the 30 years since Jean Mayer passed,
what would he learn today that he didn't know back then? In
1993, what has the research developed that the greatest
nutritionist in the world didn't know?
Dr. Mozaffarian. I'm the Jean Mayer Professor at Tufts, and
so it's quite a legacy to, and actually one of the reasons I
actively try to bring science into action, which is what Jean
Mayer's legacy was. He was not an armchair academic. Right. He
fought at the Battle of Dunkirk as a French infantryman and
helped the British escape across the channel and then fought in
the French Underground and in North Africa.
I think what has changed since Jean Mayer passed is the
unbelievable biologic complexity of how food affects our
bodies. When Jean Mayer was in his prime and training as an
excellent scientist, we thought about macronutrients and
vitamins and kind of energy processing. And that's how a lot of
Americans still think about food. They look at the back of the
package and look at the calories and the vitamins.
But food is more than vitamins and calories. Food is
biologic information. You know, everything we eat is biologic
information that affects almost every cell in our body.
Jean Mayer would be amazed at how foods affect our gut
microbiome. The fermentable fibers, the phytonutrients, the
phenolics. He would be amazed at discoveries of things
epicatechin in apples, or oleocanthal and extra virgin olive
oil, or EGCG, and T these molecules that at nano microgram
quantities have biologic effects. In the public literature,
we've measured about 100,000 compounds in food, known compounds
in food.
There are startups like Bright Seed that I advise in
California that have now documented 2 million previously
unknown compounds in plant foods and their biologic effects.
And so, I think John Meyer would be amazingly gratified and
excited about this future where we really start to unpack all
of these unbelievable biologic effects of food and how they can
be our medicine and improve our health.
Senator Markey. That is so great. And as a precursor to
this hearing, back in 1986, I was able to include language in a
bill with the support of Governor John Sununu, Republican of
New Hampshire, and proud Tufts graduate into the bill, which
then helped Jean Mayer to build a new facility for research.
I think he'd be very gratified of the research that has now
been conducted at the building that he recommended be
constructed, and that you are the Jean Mayer Professor
advancing his science and helping us all to understand much
better the impact which food has upon all of us, and how
ultimately food can be and should be medicine for every person
on this planet.
I thank Senator Marshall for recommending this hearing and
his staff and all of our great witnesses for all of your very,
very helpful testimony here today.
With that, this hearing is adjourned. Thank you.
ADDITIONAL MATERIAL


