EXAMINING THE DENTAL CARE CRISIS
IN AMERICA: HOW CAN WE MAKE
DENTAL CARE MORE AFFORDABLE
AND MORE AVAILABLE?
----------
Thursday, May 16, 2024
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:02 a.m., in
room 430, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Bernard Sanders,
Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
Present: Senators Sanders , Baldwin, Kaine,
Hassan, Lujan, Hickenlooper, Cassidy, Murkowski, Braun, and
Tuberville.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR SANDERS
The Chair. Good morning. Thank you all for being here. The
Senate Committee on Health Education, Labor, and Pensions will
come to order. When we talk about the healthcare crisis in
America, I'm afraid that far too often we ignore a very
important aspect of that crisis, and that is, the tens of
millions of Americans who are either unable to afford or unable
to access the kind of dental care that they need.
As a result, there is widespread suffering throughout the
country that largely goes unseen. This is an issue really that
is not talked about anywhere near enough, and I have
distributed for the Members of the Committee just a number of
statements that we assembled from all over the country.
We did a send out an email in Vermont, which as you know,
is a very small state. We got 500 people, 500 people who talked
about the cost of dental care or their inability to access
dentists. And we got a thousand, I think, nationwide. So, this
is an issue that's on people's mind and I think it's an issue
worthy of serious discussion here.
Today in America, nearly 70 million adults and nearly 8
million children have no dental insurance, and many of those
who do have dental insurance, find that coverage to be totally
inadequate. In fact, nearly half of Americans who have dental
insurance have skipped their appointments because they could
not afford to pay for the dental procedures they need. And I
hope one of the issues that the panel will talk about today is
why dental care is so very expensive. People walk into a dental
office and they find that they get a huge bill or pay it off
for years. Maybe we can discuss that.
Nearly one out of five seniors in America have lost all of
their natural teeth, and many of them cannot afford dentures,
which can cost many thousands of dollars.
70 percent of older Americans have some sort of periodontal
disease, which can lead to rheumatoid arthritis and
cardiovascular disease.
But it's not obviously just seniors who are hurting here.
More than 40 percent of children in America have tooth decay by
the time they reach kindergarten, primarily because their
parents could either not afford or cannot find a dentist on
time.
The lack of affordable dental care in America is a problem
all over our Country, but it is especially acute for lower
income Americans, pregnant women, people with disabilities,
veterans, those who live in rural communities and Black,
Latino, and Native Americans.
The situation has become so absurd, and this is really
quite remarkable, and I think we will hear a little bit of this
today, that every year, hundreds of thousands of Americans
leave the United States go to countries like Mexico, Costa
Rica, India, Thailand, and Hungary, where it is much less
expensive to get the dental care they need, and it's even
cheaper after paying all of your transportation costs.
We should be thinking about why that's happening in
America. And the reason is not difficult to understand. The
price of a dental implant in our Country can cost about $5,500
compared to around $850 in Mexico, $800 in Costa Rica, and $450
in India. The same treatment, the average price of a root canal
in America can cost $1,275 compared to less than $250 in
Mexico, et cetera.
Over the past week, as I mentioned, my office sent out a
request. Tell me how you are dealing with dental care? And the
response we got was just overwhelming. And the responses that
we got; you would not think would be taking place in the
richest country in the world. We can understand if we were
living in some very poor country, but that's not the case.
I think everybody knows in the medical profession, if
people don't receive high quality dental care, they are in
danger of living their lives with severe pain.
We need to understand that a major cause of absenteeism,
interestingly enough, from school, is a result of toothache and
dental pain. We need to understand that nearly half of adults
in America have some sort of periodontal disease. It makes them
two or three times more likely to have a heart attack, stroke,
or some other serious cardiovascular emergency. We need to
understand that when your teeth are in bad shape and you cannot
chew your food properly, you're in great risk of diabetes,
digestive problems, and poor birth outcomes.
There's something else that we don't talk about, that it's
not just health. When we see people without any teeth in their
mouth, that is a symbol that they are poor. Walk in, try to get
a job without any teeth in your mouth. Good luck to you because
you're not going to get it.
We've got to understand that if we're going to seriously
address the mental crisis in America, Congress is going to have
to act and act boldly. And that's why I've introduced today
what I believe is the most comprehensive piece of dental care
legislation that we have ever seen in our Country. And what
this legislation does, it would've substantially expanded the
number of dentists.
When we talk about a workforce crisis in healthcare, not
just doctors, not just nurses, it is dentists. And we need to
talk about that. Dental hygienists and dental therapists in
America, particularly in rural and underserved areas. And I
trust we'll be discussing this with the panel.
It is unacceptable to me that 67 percent of rural
communities in America are designated as dental professional
shortage areas. Furthermore, we need to make sure, and this is
a major problem, I hope we discuss as well, you can have a
dentist. Many dentists no longer treat lower income people who
are on Medicaid. And I know that in the southern part of my
state, it is acute. I'm told that kids in the southern part of
my state are having a hard time finding a dentist. And for
Vermont, generally does better than many other states in these
areas.
It is unacceptable to me that only a third of our Nation's
dentists provide care to people who are on Medicaid. And that's
a problem we got to deal with.
Third, we've got to substantially expand high quality and
comprehensive dental insurance in America. Many of our seniors
do not have a comprehensive dental insurance because
traditional Medicare does not cover most dental procedures. And
for years I have talked about, and I hope we will be able to
expand Medicare to cover dental, vision and hearing as well.
For Veterans, we have a VA system, which by and large
provides good healthcare to its people, but for whatever
reason, dental is not part of that. And I hope that we can
expand that and our legislation does that. It expands dental
care and federally qualified health centers who do a great job
but are understaffed in terms of the dentist that they have.
All right, bottom line is this is an issue that we do not
discuss enough. It is a crisis issue. And I hope that today
we're going to take this issue a major step forward, and I
thank the panelists very much for being with us.
Senator Cassidy.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR CASSIDY
Senator Cassidy. Thank you, Chairman Sanders. I'm glad
we're focusing on quality dental healthcare. The HELP Committee
has examined health workforce shortages, and so hopefully we
can come out of this with legislation that can pass, that can
address issues in the dental field.
By the way, passing legislation takes bipartisan support.
And I would ask just one more time, encourage greater
participation between the majority and the minority. If
everybody representing all the Americans we represent, both
Republicans and Democrats come together and are heard, we're
more likely to get something which can actually be signed into
law.
That's why I've said repeatedly, asking the majority to
engage the minority in preparation and crafting of these
hearings. If we want hearings to be a springboard for passing
legislation, we must lay that groundwork together.
But I also have to note that there are other urgent issues
impacting the lives of our constituents. I've requested for
months that we hold hearings on the disturbing antisemitism
spreading on college campuses. Jewish students are being
threatened and assaulted. No student should be afraid while
attending school or be a victim of bigotry, but there's not
been a commitment from the majority that we will exercise
oversight over this response or the lack of a response from
universities and the Department of Education.
We could also hold a hearing on the Biden administration's
repeated blunders and rolling out the new Free Application for
Federal Student Aid, or FAFSA application. Some students may
forego college because without financial aid offers, they don't
know if they can afford. But the incompetent Biden
administration bureaucrats who bungled the rollout are not
facing any consequences, even though students are, these issues
should be bipartisan.
We should have Secretary Cardona before this Committee to
examine him and their response. We have the time, for example,
last week, we didn't even have a hearing.
In fact, we are a year and a half into this Congress and
we've not had a single hearing on the state of primary or
secondary education in which we are the Health, Education,
Labor, and Pension Committee.
I'll stop there because I don't want to take away from
discussing dental care. I helped found a public private
partnership providing free dental and healthcare to the working
uninsured in my area in the capital region of Louisiana. I
found out that the pent-up demand for dental care is greater
than the pent-up demand for medical care.
The uninsured can go to the emergency room, but they can
get it and then get a teeth tooth pulled there, but they can't
get anything else there. Dr. Isbell is kind of shaking his head
like, he doesn't want that pulled in the emergency room. I get
that. But as a rule, the pent-up demand is greater for dental.
That said, recent data shows that 88 percent of Americans
have dental coverage. Now, despite this, some call for
mandating dental coverage under Medicare and Medicaid Right now
under Medicare, approximately 98 percent of Medicare Advantage
plans offer dental benefits and more than half of Medicare
beneficiaries are enrolled in an MA plan. That's pretty
significant.
In addition, states have the option to provide dental
coverage to adult Medicaid enrollees as Senator Sanders notes,
or at least implies, reimbursement rate under Medicaid is so
lousy that frankly it's the illusion of coverage without the
power of access. If you're losing money on every patient you
see, who's covered by Medicaid, you can't make it up with
volume. And that is how I see it. Dr. Swann agreeing with that,
that is just a reality.
I'll note that a lot of independent medical practices are
struggling to provide quality care with low reimbursement rates
and the administrative burden that comes with a Federal mandate
and some are selling their practice or the doctor is retiring.
I'm afraid that mandating dental coverage might be similarly
harmful. And with Medicare on track for insolvency in a little
over a decade, we should also think about making that
sustainable before adding programs to it.
Now looking at the commercial market, the vast majority of
patients in employer sponsored plans have the option of dental
coverage. And among employers offering health benefits in 2023,
about 90 to 94 percent of them offer dental insurance. And of
course, that allows the patient to get the option that serves
their need best. So many of these individuals currently get
dental coverage through a standalone dental plan.
While major medical plans can offer dental benefits,
standalone benefits often also have lower deductibles along
with the lower overall medical deductible. However, this year,
the Biden administration issued regulations allowing states to
require ACA plans.
ACA plans to provide dental coverage doesn't kick in until
2027, but it will raise premiums in these already expensive and
often unaffordable plans or will increase the subsidy that
taxpayers are paying, which means the cost of the bill is stuck
on all of us.
Now, it's important to note the dental care workforce is
also an issue, and that's particularly true in rural and
underserved areas and also urban areas. Senator Baldwin is the
lead sponsor of the Action for Dental Health Act, which
reauthorizes a grant program through the Health Resources and
Services Administration or HRSA, helping states to increase
their oral health workforce and provide dental care,
particularly in those underserved communities.
I worked on this before being a Ranking Member, and just to
understand the importance. The HELP Committee has dedicated
four hearings to examine health workforce shortages and two
markups as Congress. We've examined critical programs
supporting dental workforce, including the National Health
Services Corps. It's important that we get a long-term
reauthorization signed into law.
We also need to understand that with dentists, we often
don't have a supply problem, but a distribution problem. My
dentists tell me that there's certain cities we'll work in, but
the rural areas, it's more difficult to support. This year it
shows that we have 98 to 99 percent of the dentists and oral
surgeons we need, but again, the rural areas, it's only 63
percent of the general dentist and 44 percent of the oral
surgeons. So impacting the supply and distribution of dental
providers is crucial before directing the solution.
One way to address workforce shortages or work to address
workforce shortages should continue to be a top of the mind for
the Committee as there will be additional reauthorizations.
This includes the Title VII programs of the Public Health
Services Act, which contains a number of important programs
bolstering dental workforce and access to care. I look forward
to the testimony and learning more on how we can responsibly
improve dental care for all Americans. Thank you for being
here.
The Chair. Thank you, Senator Cassidy. Our first witness is
Dr. Lisa Simon, a dentist and physician, both who provides
primary care to underserved communities in the Boston area. Her
research focuses on the role of oral health and overall health
and well-being and the impact of Federal and state policy on
oral health success and access. Dr. Simon is also a member of
the faculty at Harvard Medical School.
Dr. Simon, thanks so much for being with us.
STATEMENT OF LISA SIMON, M.D., DMD, ASSOCIATE PHYSICIAN,
BRIGHAM AND WOMEN'S HOSPITAL, MEMBER OF THE FACULTY, HARVARD
MEDICAL SCHOOL, BOSTON, MA
Dr. Simon. Thank you so much, Senator Sanders for having me
here today. And thank you, Ranking Member Cassidy. I'm honored
to speak with you both today about oral health in our Country.
Senator Sanders, is a tireless advocate for the marginalized,
and, Senator Cassidy is a fellow physician. I am deeply
grateful to both of you for helping shine a light on this
invisible form of suffering.
I speak in support of Senator Sanders Comprehensive Dental
Reform Act. Practicing as a dentist in a community health
center broke my heart. The weight for my services routinely
exceeded 4 months, and I was often forced to extract teeth that
I could have saved because of insufficient Medicaid funding.
I will never forget the young woman my own age, whose front
teeth were so badly decayed that they all needed to be removed.
This remarkable young mother gave me a gift that she could
barely afford to thank me for trying to save them. Even though
she was left with a smile that would make it more difficult for
her to eat, speak, or find work.
It was patients like her who inspired me to enter medical
school and work on the crisis in oral health from both sides of
the aisle. Through medical school, I practiced dentistry at the
Suffolk County Jail, where I had multiple patients tell me that
the only good thing to happen to them since they had become
incarcerated was that they finally got to see a dentist. Now,
as an internal medicine physician, I see even more unmet dental
need than I did practicing dentistry because I see the patients
who never make it to a dental office.
I have cared for patients in the intensive care unit with
life-threatening sepsis from a dental infection. I have met
patients who cannot start chemotherapy because they can't
afford to remove their infected teeth. I have met patients with
nutrient deficiencies from ill-fitting dentures, and I have met
patients who even knowing that I'm a doctor and a dentist are
so ashamed of their teeth that they won't let me look in their
mouths.
My patient suffering is not quantifiable, but their
experiences are a part of the $22 billion a year that CMS
spends on dental care. A cost that could be much better spent
ensuring access to comprehensive and preventive services, and
not on the devastating downstream effects of unmet need.
I wish to highlight the following policies that could
dramatically improve oral health in the United States. First
make adult dental coverage a mandatory Medicaid benefit. Dental
benefits for adults are currently determined at the state level
and benefits range from comprehensive to non-existent. These
benefits are persistently threatened in times of budget
shortfall due to their optional nature. Even though data
confirms that Medicaid dental coverage can increase access to
jobs for beneficiaries. To say nothing of decreasing,
preventable suffering.
Next, Medicare must cover dental care. The 1965 Social
Security Act, statutory exclusion of dental care must be
reversed. Fewer than half of Medicare beneficiaries see a
dentist each year. When they do, they spend more than $1,000
out of pocket on their care.
My research has shown that enrolling in Medicare is
associated with a 5-percentage point jump in toothlessness. The
new limited dental benefit for which only a very few
beneficiaries will be eligible is momentous, but it is a drop
in the bucket.
A truly comprehensive Medicare dental plan has been
estimated by the Congressional Budget Office to cost CMS less
each year than the single Alzheimer's medication, Alhzeon, and
this does not include the cost savings of offering preventive
care that keeps people healthy.
Dental plans are often a draw for beneficiaries to choose
Medicare advantage, but my research has found that
beneficiaries with Medicare Advantage have rates of dental
access that are just as low and out-of-pocket costs that are
just as high as traditional Medicare beneficiaries. Medicare
Advantage is not the solution here.
Last, we must make the evolution of dental care a national
priority. Dental therapists, a provider equivalent to a
physician assistant or nurse practitioner, can expand the
dental team and bring care to communities failed by the current
system. CMS must increase its oral health infrastructure and
resources in order to lead policy innovation.
We need better NIH funding to uncover the causative links
between oral health and overall health and how our policies
affect both health and healthcare economics.
I should note that much of organized dentistry has
repeatedly lobbied against these policies dating back to 1965.
This defends the status quo of small business owners and not
the oral health of patients and communities, but it does not
speak for all dentists. Yet dentistry has been unable or
unwilling to change itself to serve the needs of more
Americans.
Both my medical and dental patients ask me the same
question. Why is it so hard for me to get dental care? There is
no good reason. There is no good reason why we live in a
country where low-income Americans are 16 times more likely to
lose all of their teeth than their wealthy neighbors. It simply
isn't fair. My patients deserve better, our Country deserves
better. Thank you for helping us achieve it.

prepared statement of lisa simon


I speak in support of Senator Sanders' Comprehensive Dental Reform
Act.
Practicing as a dentist in a community health center broke my
heart. I will never forget the young woman my own age whose front teeth
were so badly decayed that they all needed to be removed--this
remarkable young mother gave me a gift (that she could barely afford)
to thank me for trying to save them, even though she was left with a
smile that would make it more difficult for her to eat, speak, or find
work.
It was patients like her who inspired me to enter medical school
and work on the crisis in oral health from ``both sides of the aisle.''
Now as an internal medicine physician, I see even more unmet dental
need than I did practicing dentistry--I see the patients who never make
it to a dental office. I have cared for patients in the intensive care
unit with life-threatening sepsis from a tooth infection. I have met
patients who cannot start chemotherapy because they can't afford to
remove their infected teeth. I have met patients with nutrient
deficiencies from ill-fitting dentures. And I have met patients who,
even knowing that I am a doctor and a dentist, are so ashamed of their
teeth that they won't let me look in their mouths.
I wish to highlight the following policies that could dramatically
improve oral health in the U.S.:
First, make adult dental coverage a mandatory Medicaid benefit.
These benefits are persistently threatened in times of budget
shortfall due to their ``optional'' nature, even though data
confirms that Medicaid dental coverage can increase access to
jobs for beneficiaries, to say nothing of decreasing
preventable suffering.
Next, Medicare must cover dental care. A truly comprehensive
Medicare dental plan has been estimated to cost less than a
single Alzheimer's medication; and this does not include the
cost savings of offering preventive care that keeps people
healthy.
Last, we must make the evolution of dental care a national
priority through workforce expansion, increased research
funding, CMS infrastructure and program evaluation, and better
oral health data collection.
I should note that much of organized dentistry has repeatedly
lobbied against these policies, dating back to 1965. It defends the
status quo of small business owners, not the oral health of patients
and communities. It does not speak for all dentists. Yet dentistry has
been unable, or unwilling, to change itself to serve the needs of more
Americans.
Both my medical and dental patients ask me the same question: Why
is it so hard for me to get dental care? There is no good reason. There
is no good reason why we live in a country where low-income Americans
are 16 times more likely to lose all their teeth than their wealthier
neighbors. It simply isn't fair. My patients deserve better. Our
Country deserves better. Thank you for helping us achieve it.
______
The Chair. Dr. Simon, thank you very much. Our next witness
is Dr. Myechia Minter-Jordan, the president, and CEO of the
Care Quest Institute for Oral Health in Boston. Dr. Mitten-
Jordan is a physician and researcher and leads the team to
improve the oral health of all the research health improvement
programs, policy, and education.
Dr. Minter-Jordan, thanks so much for being with us.
STATEMENT OF MYECHIA MINTER-JORDAN, M.D., MBA, PRESIDENT AND
CEO CAREQUEST INSTITUTE FOR ORAL HEALTH, BOSTON, MA
Dr. Minter-Jordan. Thank you, Chairman Sanders, Ranking
Member Cassidy, and Members of the Committee. Thank you for
holding this hearing on a critical issue that deserves urgent
action. It is encouraging that policymakers like yourselves are
increasingly looking for ways to improve oral health policy. We
are particularly grateful to you, Senator Sanders, for your
leadership and reintroduction of the Comprehensive Dental
Reform Act. And thank you Senator Cassidy, Greater Baton Rouge
Community Clinic is a critical access point for oral
healthcare.
My name is Dr. Myechia Minter-Jordan. I'm the president and
CEO of the Care Quest Institute for Oral Health. Our mission is
to create a more equitable, accessible, and integrated health
system for everyone.
I'm here today to share my expertise as a physician and
community leader dedicated to improving healthcare for all
people. I'm an internist and previously served as Chief Medical
Officer and CEO of the Demic Center, one of the largest
community health centers in Massachusetts.
It was during my time at the Demic Center that I truly
understood the impact of oral disease on people's lives. The
severity of oral disease that several of our Head Start
children experienced meant that children as young as 3 years
old were put under anesthesia in order to remove decay and
repair and stop the progression of their oral health disease.
Oral health is so much more than a nice smile. It has far-
reaching impacts on overall health. Hypertension, diabetes,
heart disease, dementia, and adverse birth outcomes all have a
direct correlation to oral health.
Dental disease can also threaten family financial stability
as well as state and Federal healthcare budgets. It can keep
children home from school and adults from being able to work.
It can cause pain so severe that people cannot eat or conduct
their routine activities of daily living. In fact, lost work
productivity time due to untreated dental disease cost the U.S.
an estimated $45 billion each year.
Yet oral health remains siloed from the rest of the
healthcare system. Millions of people cannot access their oral
healthcare that they need most often because they cannot afford
it. Delays in care likely cost the system far more than a
routine preventative visit would have. Dental care is the No. 1
medical service skipped due to cost, even more than
prescription drugs.
Nearly 70 million adults in the United States do not have
dental insurance. Medicare does not cover routine dental care,
leaving half of Medicare enrollees, nearly 25 million older
Americans and people with disabilities without dental benefits.
There is currently no financial support for adults to purchase
dental insurance through the health insurance marketplace. And
adult dental coverage is optional under state Medicaid
programs, which means that coverage varies widely from
extensive benefits to none at all.
Dental coverage gaps have exacerbated a nationwide oral
health crisis that forces many people to forego critical dental
care.
Quest Institute for Oral Health conducts an annual
nationally representative survey on consumer access to,
experience with, and knowledge about healthcare. Our findings
continue to show that this crisis is widespread and
disproportionately impacts low-income individuals, people in
rural communities and racial and ethnic minorities.
For example, adults with lower incomes are significantly
more likely than those with higher incomes to report costs as a
barrier to seeing a dentist. In the last 2 years, 34 percent of
individuals living in a rural environment rate their oral
health as fair or poor, which is about 10 percent higher than
for people in urban and suburban areas. And Black adults are 68
percent more likely to have an unmet dental need than white
adults. Prevalence of early childhood tooth decay in American
Indian and Alaskan native communities is three times higher
than it is for white children.
Progress is being made, private and public payers are
increasingly recognizing the positive impact on overall health
outcomes and reduction in the total cost of care that routine
oral healthcare can offer.
Addressing coverage gaps is a foundational step toward a
more integrated system that allows us to invest in prevention,
bolster the oral health workforce, and improve the exchange of
health information between medical and dental providers.
Integration not only improves the care experience, it
reduces cost. For instance, care Quest Institute research shows
that healthcare costs for adults with diabetes could be $3,000
less each year if they get periodontal treatment. Think about
how much that would save if the nearly 40 million people in
this country with diabetes all had access to integrated care
that includes dental.
We have the model, look at the integration we achieve in
many of our Nation's community health centers, and the progress
we have made with primary care and behavioral health. It is
time to bring that to oral health. The data continues to tell
an unacceptable story, not only in terms of the impact on oral
health status, but also on overall health outcomes.
It is time to change this story. It is up to all of us, the
policymakers in this room, providers, educators, and advocates
to create a more accessible, equitable and integrated
healthcare system. Thank you for having me here today. It is an
honor.

prepared statement of myechia minter-jordan
Introduction
Chairman Sanders, Ranking Member Cassidy, and Members of the
Committee thank you for having me here today and holding this hearing
on a critical issue that has been overlooked for far too long.
My name is Myechia Minter-Jordan, M.D., MBA, and I am the president
and CEO of the CareQuest Institute for Oral Health. I previously served
as chief medical officer and CEO of the Dimock Center, one of the
largest community health centers in Massachusetts, and at Johns Hopkins
Medicine as an attending physician and instructor of medicine. I am
here today to share my expertise as a physician and community leader
dedicated to improving health care for all people.
During my time at Dimock, I witnessed the devastating consequences
of oral disease on children who were part of our Head Start/Early Head
Start program. The severity of disease that our young participants were
experiencing--some as young as 3 years old--meant that these children
were sedated with anesthesia to perform the level of restorative care
needed to remove tooth decay and halt the progression of the disease.
That was a moment of reckoning for me. It was unacceptable that a
preventable disease was impacting our children in this way. This
experience is what ultimately led me to my work at CareQuest Institute.
At CareQuest Institute, our dedicated team of experts is committed
to creating a more accessible, equitable, and integrated health system
for everyone. We are championing a more equitable future where every
person has access to high-quality oral health care and can reach their
full potential through excellent health.
Right now, our health care system does not work for everyone
because it was not built for everyone--people of color, people with
lower incomes, those living in rural communities, people with
disabilities, older adults, and other historically marginalized groups
have been left behind. Further, our health care system and health
insurance policies still largely treat the mouth as separate from the
rest of the body, leaving oral health care unaffordable and out of
reach for millions of Americans.
However, we are making progress.
Investments and advancements in research have ensured that today,
we have a much stronger clinical understanding of all the ways oral
health impacts our overall health and well-being. CareQuest Institute
and other leaders in the field are leveraging this clinical knowledge
to design, pilot, and scale validated models of integrated care.
Oral health is also increasingly part of health policy
conversations. This hearing is proof of that.
Oral health has been more directly tied into policy discussions
around lowering health care costs, improving health, and advancing
equity than ever before. In fact, over the last 3 years, we've
experienced some of the most productive and effective policy
discussions in decades, including key improvements made by our current
Administration regarding Medicare and the essential health benefits in
the health insurance Marketplaces.
While this momentum is encouraging, the fact remains that we have
an oral health crisis in this country. It is time to build on the
recent momentum and identify opportunities to address the most
significant barriers to oral health.
National Oral Health Crisis: Impact on American Families
CareQuest Institute for Oral Health conducts an annual, nationally
representative survey on consumer access to, experience with, and
knowledge about oral health care. Between this survey, our other
consumer-focused research, and analyses by additional leaders in the
field, findings continue to show that this crisis is widespread, and
disproportionately impacts low-income individuals, older adults, people
living with disabilities, people in rural communities, and racial and
ethnic minorities. For example:
Adults with lower incomes are significantly more
likely than those with higher incomes to report cost as a
barrier to seeing a dentist in the last 2 years. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Heaton, Lisa J., Santoro, Morgan, Martin, Paige, and Tranby,
Eric P. Cost, Race, and the Persistent Challenges in Our Oral Health
System. Boston, MA; June 2023. https://doi.org/10.35565/CQI.2023.2005.
When people from lower-income families are able to
access dental care, they are paying over seven times more out-
of-pocket for their dental care than higher-income families.
\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ CareQuest Institute for Oral Health. Lower-Income Families
Still Spend More on Dental Care. Boston, MA: May 2024.
One in five adults aged 65 years or older have
untreated tooth decay and about 2 in 3 (68 percent) have gum
disease. \3\, \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Dye, Bruce, Thornton-Evans, Gina, Li, Xianfen, Lafolla,
Timothy. Dental Caries and Tooth Loss in Adults in the United States,
2011-2012. Hyattsville, MD; May 2015. NCHS Data Brief. (197):197. PMID:
2597.
\4\ Eke, Paul I., Dye, Bruce A., Wei, Li, et al. Update on
Prevalence of Periodontitis in Adults in the United States: NHANES 2009
to 2012. Journal of Periodontology. May 2015;86(5):611-622. DOI:
10.1902/jop.2015.140520.
Individuals in households experiencing disabilities
are more frequently denied health care or oral health care due
to discrimination--more than half (52.8 percent) compared to
36.9 percent in households not experiencing disability and
visit the emergency department for dental care or pain three
times more compared to households not experiencing disability.
\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ CareQuest Institute for Oral Health. Family Affair: A Snapshot
of Oral Health Disparities and Challenges in Individuals in Household
Experiencing Disability. Boston, MA: October 2022.
Thirty four percent of individuals living in a rural
environment rate their oral health as fair or poor, which is
about 10 percent higher than for people in urban and suburban
areas. \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Martin, Paige, Santoro, Morgan, Heaton, Lisa J., Preston,
Rebecca, Tranby, Eric P. Still Searching: Meeting Oral Health Needs in
Rural Settings. Boston, MA. November 2023. https://doi.org/10.35565/
CQI.2023.2007.
Four in 10 adults in rural areas have not seen a
dentist for over a year, which is about 10 percent higher than
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
in urban and suburban areas. \6\
Black adults are 68 percent more likely to have an
unmet dental need than white adults, and the prevalence of
early childhood tooth decay in American Indian and Alaska
Native communities is three times higher than it is for white
children. \7\, \8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ CareQuest Institute for Oral Health. New Oral Health Data
Reflect Inequities, Barriers. Boston, MA; https://doi.org/10.35565/
CQI.2020.4001.
\8\ CareQuest Institute for Oral Health. American Indian and
Alaska Native Communities Face a `Disproportionate Burden of Oral
Disease': Reversing Inequities Involves Challenges and Opportunities.
Boston, MA: March 2023. https://doi.org/10.35565/CQI.2023.2002.
Black and Hispanic adults report that they have never
been to a dentist at more than twice the rate of white adults.
\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Heaton, Lisa J., Santoro, Morgan, Martin, Paige, and Tranby,
Eric P. Cost, Race, and the Persistent Challenges in Our Oral Health
System. Boston, MA; June 2023. https://doi.org/10.35565/CQI.2023.2005.
So much more than a nice smile, oral health has significant impacts
\10\ on overall health and well-being. Hypertension, diabetes, heart
disease, dementia, and adverse birth outcomes all have a direct
correlation with oral health.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ CareQuest Institute for Oral Health. Impacts Beyond the
Mouth. Boston, MA; June 2020.
Dental disease can also threaten family financial stability; it can
keep children home from school and adults from being able to work; \11\
it can cause pain so debilitating that people cannot eat or conduct
routine activities of daily living.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ CareQuest Institute for Oral Health. The Hour of Need:
Productivity Time Lost Due to Urgent Dental Needs. Boston, MA; January
2024.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For example:
About half of adults with health care debt (49
percent) say dental bills caused some of their debt. \12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Lopes, Lunna, Kearney, Audrey, Montero, Alex, et al. Health
Care Debt in the U.S.: The Broad Consequences of Medical and Dental
Bills. KFF. June 2022. https://www.kff.org/report-section/kff-health-
care-debt-survey-main-findings/.
Adults in the U.S. miss more than 243 million hours
of work or school each year due to oral health problems and
children lose 34 million school hours each year because of
unplanned (emergency) dental care. \13\, \14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ CareQuest Institute for Oral Health. The Hour of Need:
Productivity Time Lost Due to Urgent Dental Needs. Boston, MA: January
2024.
\14\ Naavaal, Shillpa, Kelekar, Uma. School Hours Lost Due to
Acute/Unplanned Dental Care. Health Behavior and Policy Review. March
2019; 5(2): 66-73. https://doi.org/10.14485/hbpr.5.2.7..
Lost work productivity time due to untreated dental
disease costs the U.S. an estimated $45 billion each year. \15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Jevdevic, Milica. Toward Evidence-based Oral Health Care: The
Potential of Health Economics. Radboud University. 2022. https://
repository.ubn.ru.nl/bitstream/handle/2066/250096/
250096.pdf'sequence=1#page=30.
Nearly 18 percent of all working-age adults and 29
percent of those with lower incomes report that the appearance
of their mouth and teeth affects their ability to interview for
a job. \16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Health Policy Institute. Oral Health and Well-Being in the
United States. American Dental Association. https://www.ada.org/-/
media/project/ada-organization/ada/ada-org/files/resources/research/
hpi/us-oral-health-well-being.pdf.
This crisis has far-reaching consequences for American families.
National Oral Health Crisis Stems from Barriers to Affordability and
Lack of Coverage
The fact that dental coverage and care remain largely separate from
medical has had a profound impact on affordability and access to
services. Millions of people across the country cannot access the oral
health care they need, most often because they cannot afford it. \17\
In fact, dental care is the No. 1 medical service skipped due to cost,
even more than prescription drugs. \18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ CareQuest Institute for Oral Health. Oral Disease is Common.
Access to Care is Not. Boston, MA:July 2021.
\18\ Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Economic
Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2022. Federal Reserve. May 2023.
https://www.Federalreserve.gov/publications/files/2022-report-economic-
well-being-us-households202305.pdf.
Nearly 70 million adults and nearly 8 million children in the
United States do not have dental insurance. \19\, \20\ This is in large
part because:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ CareQuest Institute for Oral Health. Uninsured and In Need:
68.5 Million Lack Dental Insurance, More May Be Coming. Boston, MA:
August 2023.
\20\ U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National
Institutes of Health, National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial
Research. Oral Health in America: Advances and Challenges. Bethesda,
MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Accessed May 14,
2024. https://www.nidcr.nih.gov/sites/default/files/2021-12/Oral-
Health-in-America-Advances-and-Challenges.pdf#page=159.
Traditional Medicare doesn't cover dental services
except under very specific and extreme circumstances. As a
result, half of all Medicare enrollees don't have dental
coverage, meaning nearly 25 million older Americans and people
with disabilities lack access to this critical form of health
care. \21\ Around the same number of Medicare enrollees haven't
visited a dentist in 12 months. \21\ While people who have
Medicare Advantage may get some dental coverage, the benefits
can vary widely from plan to plan, and they may come with
limited provider networks. \21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ Freed, Meredith, Nancy Ochieng, Nolan Sroczynski, Anthony
Damico, and Krutika Amin. Medicare and Dental Coverage: A Closer Look.
KFF, 2021. https://www.kff.org/Medicare/issue-brief/Medicare-and-
dental-coverage-a-closer-look/.
CareQuest Institute for Oral Health estimates that
there are about 14.7 million people who purchase health
insurance through the Marketplace, but still do not have or are
not able to purchase dental coverage. \22\ Many people have
financial support to purchase health insurance coverage through
their state's Marketplace but are not allowed to use that
subsidy toward dental benefits for adults. While states can now
change that through a new rule that allows adult dental
services to be included as Essential Health Benefits, we know
only some states will choose to do so. \23\ Additionally, if an
individual has health insurance but not dental insurance, (e.g.
through their employer) they cannot independently purchase a
dental plan through their state marketplace even if they can
afford to do so. \24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ CareQuest Institute for Oral Health. Estimates from CareQuest
Institute Analysis of CMS Exchange PUFs and 2024 OEP PUFs. May 2025
(Unpublished).
\23\ Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. HHS Finalizes
Policies to Make Marketplace Coverage More Accessible and Expand
Essential Health Benefits. Baltimore, MD: CMS, 2024. https://
www.cms.gov/newsroom/press-releases/hhs-finalizes-policies-make-
marketplace-coverage-more-accessible-and-expand-essential-health.
\24\ National Association of Dental Plans. Expand Dental Coverage
on Federal Marketplaces. Dallas, Texas, 2023. https://www.nadp.org/wp-
content/uploads/2022/09/Expand-Dental-Coverage-on-Federal-Marketplaces-
2022.pdf.
Most states do not offer the extensive Medicaid
dental benefits that adults need to maintain optimal oral
health. \25\ Adult dental coverage is optional for state
Medicaid programs, and many states provide no, little, or
emergency-only coverage. \26\ Even when a state does provide
adult dental coverage, the benefits are always at risk of
reduction or elimination, especially during economic downturns
when states face budget pressures. \28\ This patchwork approach
creates uncertainty among patients and providers, reduces
access, and impacts health outcomes. Moreover, the recent
Medicaid redetermination process has resulted in millions of
people losing their health coverage, including dental coverage,
often unnecessarily. Our analysis shows that 12 million adults
and children nationwide lost Medicaid dental coverage in 2023.
\27\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ CareQuest Institute for Oral Health. Medicaid Adult Dental
Coverage Checker. Boston, MA: CareQuest Institute, 2024.
\26\ Vujicic, Marko, Fosse, Chelsea, Reusch, Colin, Burroughs
Melissa, American Dental Association, ADA Health Policy Institute,
Families USA, and Community Catalyst. Making the Case for Dental
Coverage for Adults in All State Medicaid Programs. Health Policy White
Paper, July 2021. https://www.ada.org/-/media/project/ada-organization/
ada/ada-org/files/resources/research/hpi/whitepaper-0721.pdf.
\27\ CareQuest Institute for Oral Health. An Estimated 12 Million
Children and Adults Lost Medicaid Dental Insurance After the COVID-19
Public Health Emergency Expired. Boston, MA: CareQuest Institute, March
2024.
The lack of dental coverage options exacerbates our national oral
health crisis and forces many people to forgo critical dental care,
leading to deep inequities in access and outcomes. Addressing these
gaps is a critical and foundational step to realizing a health system
that prioritizes prevention, bolsters the oral health workforce,
integrates medical and dental care, and improves the exchange of health
information between medical and dental providers.
The Economic and Health Benefits of Oral Health Prevention
If we want to truly improve overall health, we need to prevent oral
health disease before it takes hold.
Access to dental care is critical for preventing oral disease and
keeping other health conditions from worsening. Poor oral health has a
direct link to a person's overall health, including greater risk of
diabetes, hypertension, obesity, dementia, mental health issues, and
adverse birth outcomes. \28\ Given that there are persistent health
inequities associated with many, if not all, of these conditions,
preventing oral disease may also be key to tackling disparities that
exist throughout our health care system.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\28\ Heaton, Lisa J., Tiwari, Tamanna, Tranby, Eric P. CareQuest
Institute for Oral Health. Oral-Systemic Interactions and Medical-
Dental Integration: A Life Course Approach. Boston, MA: CareQuest
Institute, September 2023. https://doi.org/10.35565/CQI.2023.2010.
For example, oral health prevention can have a significant impact
on maternal health--another area of health care experiencing
devastating disparities in outcomes. Research shows that maternal
periodontal (gum) disease is associated with preterm birth, development
of preeclampsia (maternal high blood pressure), and delivery of a
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
small-for-gestational age infant.
Conversely, studies show that periodontal treatment for pregnant
women can result in a nearly four-fold reduction in the rate of preterm
delivery. \29\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ Boggess, Kim A., Edelstein, Burton L. Oral Health in Women
During Preconception and Pregnancy: Implications for Birth Outcomes and
Infant Oral Health. Matern Child Health J. 5 Suppl,10 (Sept 2006):
S169-7, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1592159/pdf/10995-
2006-Article-95.pdf.
Prevention also results in clear cost savings for the health
system--including the Federal Government. For example, preventing and
appropriately addressing oral disease keeps people out of emergency
rooms. Dental-related ED visits nationwide cost an estimated $2.1
billion per year, but nearly 79 percent of those visits could've been
addressed in a dental office, saving up to $1.7 billion per year. \30\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\30\ American Dental Association. Emergency Department Referrals.
American Dental Association, 2024. https://www.ada.org/en/resources/
community-initiatives/action-for-dental-health/emergency-department-
referrals.
Similarly, appropriate oral health care can also improve overall
health outcomes and lead to cost savings on medical expenses. For
example, CareQuest Institute researchers found that periodontal
treatment for people with diabetes can reduce overall health care costs
by about $3000 annually, per person. This finding was applicable to
both commercially insured and Medicaid enrollees with diabetes who had
received periodontal treatment within the previous 2 years. \31\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ Thakkar-Samtani, Madhuli, Heaton, Lisa J., Kelly, Abigail,
Taylor, Shelly, Vidone, Linda, Tranby, Eric P. Periodontal Treatment
Associated with Decreased Diabetes Mellitus-Related Treatment Costs: An
Analysis of Dental and Medical Claims Data. J Am Dent Assoc. 154, no 4.
(Apr 2023):283-292.e1. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36841690/.
There are nearly 40 million people in this country with diabetes.
In Medicare alone, there is the potential to save up to $14.5 billion
annually for patients with diabetes and up to $27.8 billion annually
for patients with heart disease if these patients were to receive
periodontal care. \32\ Millions more people in this country have other
comorbidities that can be improved or more effectively managed with
proper oral health care resulting in significant health care savings if
they all had access to necessary care.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\32\ Heaton, Lisa J., Leonin, Elizabeth, Schroeder, Kelly, Tranby,
Eric P., Matthew, Rebekah. Another Billion Reasons for a Medicare
Dental Benefit. Boston, MA: CareQuest Institute, September 2022.
https://doi.org/10.35565/CQI.2022.2006.
Investing in prevention will keep oral disease from getting worse,
make people healthier overall, and result in cost savings for the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
government.
Closing the Gap: Integrating Medical and Dental Care for Better Health
Outcomes
A more integrated system allows us to invest in prevention, bolster
the oral health workforce, and improve the exchange of health
information between medical and dental providers. Medical-dental
integration is a necessary approach to improving systems so that all
providers have a full view of their patients' needs, connecting oral
health care with primary care, behavioral health, and more.
Integration models can be adapted to meet the needs of communities,
systems, and providers. These models include school-based dental
programs, oral health screenings at a primary care visit, blood
pressure screenings at a dental visit, and/or using technology like
teledentistry and mobile dentistry to reach rural areas or dental
deserts. Patients report wanting these kinds of integrated care
options, though few have yet to experience them. \33\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\33\ Heaton, Lisa J., Santoro, Morgan, Martin, Paige, Tranby, Eric
P. Experiences with and Outcomes of Oral Health Care: Perspectives from
Nationally Representative Data. Boston, MA; March 2024. https://
doi.org/DOI:10.35565/CQI.2024.2001.
Moreover, medical-dental integration can improve patients' care
experiences and reduce costs. The CDC estimates that integrating basic
health screenings into a dental setting could save the health care
system up to $100 million every year. \34\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\34\ Nasseh, Kamyar, Greenberg, Barbara, Vujicic, Marko, Glick,
Michael. The Effect of Chairside Chronic Disease Screenings by Oral
Health Professionals on Health Care Dollars. Am J Public Health.
2014;104(4):744-750. https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2013.301644.
Medical-Oral Expanded Care (MORE Care) is an integration model that
CareQuest Institute leads. This program builds effective
interprofessional referral relationships between dentists and primary
care providers. \35\ For example, a pediatrician at nationwide
Children's Hospital in Ohio is integrating oral health screenings into
well-child visits as part of her participation in MORE Care, a practice
that is surprisingly uncommon. Through this model, the pediatrician
assesses the child's teeth for signs of cavities and checks to see if
the child has seen a dentist or received a fluoride varnish
application. When the screenings indicate that the patient needs more
extensive oral health care, she can effectively refer her patients to a
dentist at Midwest Dental Center in Toledo, Ohio. \36\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\35\ Kanan, Christine, Ohrenberger, Kelli, Bayham, Mary, et al.
MORE Care: An Evaluation of an Interprofessional Oral Health Quality
Improvement Initiative. J Public Health Dent. 2020;80 Suppl 2:S58-S70.
https://doi.org/10.1111/jphd.12407.
\36\ CareQuest Institute for Oral Health. Double the Care: How
Medical-Dental Integration Is Expanding Access in Ohio. Boston, MA: May
2023.
Oftentimes, this form of integrated care connects children to
preventative oral health services sooner than if their parents waited
until their next dental visit or until their condition worsened to seek
care. This model also helps educate parents about the importance of
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
oral health for children, even at an early age.
While integration can, and often should, take many different forms,
an essential component of any integrated model must be the safe and
secure sharing of relevant health information with a patient's full
care team. This both encourages and enables providers to develop
comprehensive care plans that address patients' needs in an
interdisciplinary way.
We have the model for success. Just look at what we have achieved
in so many of our Nation's community health centers and pilot programs,
and how far we have come in connecting primary care and behavioral
health. It is time to invest in and scale that model to include oral
health.
It's Time to Change the Story
Improvements are being made, but the data continue to tell an
unacceptable story--not only in terms of the impact on oral health
status but also on overall health outcomes.
The data demonstrates, and our experience tells us, that this is a
systemic problem that requires a systemic solution.
No story better illustrates the tragic outcome of a fragmented and
disjointed system than Deamonte Driver's.
Many of you may be familiar with Deamonte's story, but for those
who are not, Deamonte Driver died from a toothache. He was 12 years
old.
It sounds implausible, but that is exactly what happened.
Deamonte couldn't get the basic oral health care he needed to treat
his tooth decay. Eventually, bacteria from his abscessed tooth spread
to his brain, and that infection killed him after 6 weeks in the
hospital.
That was 17 years ago, and while some things have changed in
response to this unnecessary tragedy, particularly in children's oral
health policy, we are still grappling with many of the same systemic
issues that Deamonte and his family faced and continue to face today.
Social determinants of health, lack of consistent coverage, not
being able to find a dental provider, and many more factors all
contributed to Deamonte's death.
It's time to change the story. It's up to all of us--the
policymakers in this room, providers, educators, and advocates to
create a more accessible, equitable, and integrated oral health care
system.
The time is now.
______

I am the president and CEO of the CareQuest Institute for Oral
Health, where our mission is to create a more accessible, equitable,
and integrated health system for everyone. I am here today to share my
expertise as a physician and community leader dedicated to improving
health care for all people.
Oral health is so much more than just a nice smile. It has far-
reaching impacts on overall health. Hypertension, diabetes, heart
disease, dementia, and adverse birth outcomes all have a direct
correlation to oral health. Dental disease can also threaten family
financial stability as well as state and Federal health care budgets;
it can keep children home from school and adults from being able to
work; it can cause pain so severe that people cannot eat or conduct
routine activities of daily living.
CareQuest Institute for Oral Health conducts an annual, nationally
representative survey on consumer access to, experience with, and
knowledge about oral health care. Our findings, as discussed in my oral
and written testimonies, continue to show that this crisis is
widespread, and disproportionately impacts low-income individuals,
people in rural communities, and racial and ethnic minorities. These
findings also show that dental coverage gaps have exacerbated a
nationwide oral health crisis that forces many people to forgo critical
dental care.
While the situation is dire, progress is being made, and that
momentum is encouraging. Private and public payers are increasingly
recognizing the positive impact on overall health outcomes and
reduction in the total cost of care that routine oral health care can
offer. Medical and dental providers are looking for ways to effectively
collaborate. And encouragingly, policymakers are talking about these
issues more than ever and taking steps toward change. It's up to all of
us--the policymakers in this room, providers, educators, and advocates
to create a more accessible, equitable, and integrated health care
system that includes oral health.
______
The Chair. Thank you very much for your testimony and your
work.
Our next witness is Dr. Brian Jeffrey Swann, a dentist who
serves in the board of directors of Remote Area Medical, a
volunteer organization that provides pop-up medical clinics
around the United States offering dental, vision and general
medical care at no cost to patients. Dr. Swann is also co-chair
of the global Oral health outreach at the National Dental
Association.
Dr. Swann, thanks a lot for being with us.
STATEMENT OF BRIAN JEFFREY SWANN, DMD, MPH, BOARD OF,
DIRECTORS, REMOTE AREA MEDICAL (RAM), CO-CHAIR, GLOBAL ORAL
HEALTH OUTREACH, NATIONAL DENTAL ASSOCIATION, ROCKFORD, TN
Dr. Swann. It's my pleasure. Thank you, Chairman Sanders,
and Ranking Member, Dr. Bill Cassidy. It's a pleasure to be
here with the HELP Committee.
The Chair. If you could talk a little bit louder, it would
be great.
Dr. Swann. My name is Brian Swann. I'm testifying today as
a former private and now public health trained oral physician
practicing in Tennessee, North Carolina, and Massachusetts. My
primary residence is East Tennessee in a small town called
Greenback, not far from where I was born. When I was 7 years
old, my family moved to California. Starting as a cleaning lady
for affluent white families, my mother eventually enrolled and
completed dental assisting courses. At age 12, I had my first
general visit with my mother's employer, the only Black dentist
in the area. He diagnosed me with 13 cavities. All in need of
intervention.
I often ponder my complex pathway to oral healthcare and
the sometimes torturous or frankly impossible path, many in
this country are faced to navigate in search of dental care.
Today I serve on the board of the Remote Area of Medical, as
well as co-chair of the Committee on Global Health and Outreach
for the National Dental Association.
RAM is a major nonprofit provider for these pop-up medical
clinics, and the mission is to prevent pain and alleviate
suffering by providing free dental, vision, medical and dental
services to underserved and uninsured individuals. RAM's core
is more than 200,000 humanitarian volunteers. Along with
licensed dentist, vision, and medical professionals, they have
treated more than 900,000 individuals and delivered more than
$200 million worth of healthcare services. Today, RAM is
nearing its 1400th clinic.
It also partners with organizations striving to make a
positive change regarding access to care. One of these
organizations, RAM partners with is the National Dental
Association, whose mission is to serve marginalized and
oppressed communities. And also, was the Dental Association in
1965 that argued that Medicare should include dental care.
The people that come to RAM for assistance often drive
across two or three state lines, sleeping in their cars,
wrapped in blankets to stay warm. Many people come days before
the clinic just to ensure that they get a ticket. Patients
suffer from cavities from gum disease, and this is concerning
due to the interplay of gum disease and diabetes.
Nowhere can the necessity of RAM be more seen than the
story of Jade, who I've had permission from her mother to talk
about her case. She was a 27-year-old Appalachian woman with a
history of type one diabetes that led to placement of a port
after two thirds of her right lung had been removed. She
developed swelling called cellulitis under her chin and neck
region from a decayed infected lower molar.
Due to the swelling and pain, lack of dental care, she did
what many patients do, and that was to visit the emergency
department at the local hospital. She was given antibiotics and
pain medication, in the form of pills, and then went to seek
dental care.
She went to see the local dentist who had recently
extracted all of her mom's teeth and was told that $900 was the
cost to remove this one offending tooth. Not having the cash,
she decided to wait the anticipated refund check. The following
month swelling had advanced and she was prescribed more of the
same medications, which is an antibiotic and opioid which
alleviated symptoms but not treat the problem. In the third
month, she contracted COVID, which impaired her breathing even
more. She was given yet more antibiotics and pain medication,
which she could no longer swallow.
The following month, she returned to the hospital unable to
swallow her neck, her neck had turned black. The doctors
immediately put her in an ambulance and rushed her to a nearby
university hospital, only 35 minutes away where she was given
antibiotics through an IV and the tooth was removed. Sadly, 2
days later, she died. The cause of death was listed as sepsis
from an infected tooth derived from a condition called Ludwig's
angina.
As this is typical in the U.S. medical schools, the
hospital doctors had not received even limited training in oral
health, which may have contributed to Jade's death. Her mother
and her husband of 1 year, who are now in therapy proclaimed,
if they had only told us that a tooth infection could kill my
daughter.
There is need to bring attention to the social determinants
of health and begin the process of educating not only patients,
but the community and all professionals on what is needed for
sustainability and longevity of our oral and systemic health.
RAM presents an immediate short-term solution to a long-term
problem.
Prevention, education. A high percentage of our patients
have low health IQ, not understanding what's happening to the
oral cavity and how it's connected and contributes to what's
happening in the rest of the body. Specific dental education
should be provided to patients during all touchpoint, enhanced
digitization as well.
We need to increase the number of states who provide non-
emergency adult Medicaid services, which usually is medication
and or an extraction. And the logistics for that needs to come
from more dental associations, not only the NDA. RAM is also
concerned about temporary state licenses for volunteer work,
which would apply to dentist hygienists and assistants. This
will resolve the dearth of state licensed healthcare providers
and open the doors to healthcare providers licensed in other
states to volunteer and provide care at RAM events.
I went to the dental field inspired by my mother. Over the
years, working with RAM and the NDA, I have seen personally the
human connection when a human being comes into these clinics
for treatment, most often to escape pain and discomfort and is
treated with respect. In the process, immense gratitude is
felt, but not just for the patient, for everyone involved. We
all receive a blessing in this exchange, and this is work. The
history can be made today, but there needs to be a shift.

prepared statement of brian swann
Greetings Chairman Sanders, Ranking Member Bill Cassidy, M.D., and
Members of the Committee.
Thank you for this opportunity to appear before this Committee to
discuss the causes and results of oral health shortages in The United
States of America.
About Me
My name is Brian Jeffery Swann, testifying as an Oral Physician
practicing in Tennessee, North Carolina, and Massachusetts in public
health capacity. I am a board member of Remote Area Medicine (RAM), and
a member and co-chair of the Committee on Global Oral Health Outreach
for the National Dental Association. I provide clinical care as a
volunteer with the RAM organization. Over 900,000 patients have
received treatment at no cost.
I reside in an Appalachian town of Greenback, Tennessee not far
from where I was born. I was inspired to become a dentist through my
Mother, who was a dental assistant and a community advocate. After her
passing in 2018, she was memorialized in the California House of
Representatives for her contributions to health and education. At age
12, I had my first dental visit. I had 13 cavities and spent numerous
days as a patient and for the exposure. The independence of the dentist
and his contribution to the community resonated with me as a career
choice and saved my dentition. I was not aware of the significance at
the time, but it was a crossroad.
After her passing in 2018, she was memorialized in the California
House of Representatives for her contributions to health and education.
About RAM
RAM is a major nonprofit provider of free pop-up medical clinics.
The mission is to prevent pain and alleviate suffering by providing
free, quality health care to those in need. We do this by delivering
free dental, vision, and medical services to undeserved and uninsured
individuals. RAM's Corps of more than 212,700 Humanitarian Volunteers
along with licensed dental, vision, and medical professionals have
treated more than 940,700 individuals, delivering over $200,000,000
worth of health care services. Today, RAM is nearing its 1400th clinic.
RAM also partners with other organizations striving to make a positive
change in access to care. One of the organizations RAM partners with is
The National Dental Association.
NDA/Harvard School of Dental Medicine
Founded in 1913, The National Dental Association's mission is to
serve the marginalized and oppressed communities. I co-chair the global
outreach committee which focuses on those marginalized and oppressed
communities that have a shortage of dental care. Our aim includes
mobilizing students and practicing dentists to join forces with
existing interventions and outreach programs to provide needed care.
This also serves as a teaching opportunity for student members.
As an assistant professor at the Harvard School of Dental Medicine,
my students and I were introduced to the Medicine Wheel. The wheel
charts the ingredients of optimal health. This tool combined with the
fact that John Harvard who started America's first college, also began
one of its first Indian Schools. Revisiting these facts, we began a
program with the Wampanoag tribe that historically greeted the Pilgrims
on Cape Cod. Specifically, we were drawn to the Aquinnah Wampanoag
tribe on Martha's Vineyard (MVI).
In addition to Martha's Vineyard being home to many wealthy
families in America, its original inhabitants have lived there between
10 to 14,000 years. Relative to dental treatment, the Island represents
a microcosm of how dentistry looks across the Nation. In 2013, the
Martha's Vineyard hospital had a two (dental) operatory clinic which
excepted dental benefits or insurances. All other dental offices on the
island were cash only; they did not except any insurances. With the
closure of the hospital dental clinic in 2020, a significant number of
the year-round residents, including blue-collar workers and tribal
members, had to go off island, a multiple hour, weather dependent
journey each way, to seek affordable care. This necessitates an entire
day off from work or school for an appointment that might last an hour.
This is a prime example of the issues surrounding the complexity and
unavailability of access to care. The social determinants of health
that apply to this example include, rural location, transportation,
affordability, elderly age of the population and the limited workforce.
Adding to the issues of cost, when providers do not accept dental
insurance there is no regulation of fees charged to the patients. In
some cases, prices exceed mainland averages by 30 percent.
The NEED
The need for organizations like RAM and its partners, are more than
necessary to continue to make change, and to support human beings and
their basic rights to be cared for. RAM provides opportunities for
people to experience relief from various ailments that can be life
changing. The people that come to RAM for assistance, often drive
across multiple stateliness. They are advised to prepare to sleep in
their cars, wrapped in blankets to stay warm. Many come days before the
clinic opens to ensure that they receive a ticket to get the care they
have come so far to obtain. Our patients suffer from the most prominent
oral diseases, tooth decay and periodontal (gum) disease, which are the
most prevalent diseases worldwide among children and adults according
to the 2019 Global Burden of Diseases report. Also mentioned in this
report is the connection between gum disease and Type 2 Diabetes along
with other systemic illnesses including obesity, poor nutrition, kidney
disease, lung disease, dementia, cancer, osteoarthritis, and heart
disease. A high percentage of patients with a low health IQ, do not
understand that what is happening in the oral cavity is connected to
and may contribute to what is happening in the rest of their body.
Preventive education is key.
Jade's Story
Jade was a 27-year-old, Appalachian woman with a history of type 2
diabetes that led to placement of a port after 2/3 of her right lung
was removed. She developed swelling called cellulitis under her chin
and neck region from a decayed and infected lower molar. Due to the
swelling and pain and lacking a dental home, she did what many patients
do and visited the emergency department at the local hospital for care.
She was given antibiotics and pain medication in the form of pills and
told to seek dental care. She went to the dentist (who had recently
extracted all her mother's teeth) and was told that $900 was the cost
to remove the one offending tooth. Not having the cash, she decided to
wait for an anticipated refund check. The following month the swelling
had advanced, and she was prescribed more of the same medications which
alleviated symptoms but did not treat the problem. In the 3rd month she
contracted COVID which impaired her breathing even more.
Jade was given yet more antibiotics and pain medication which she
could no longer swallow. The following month, she returned to the
hospital a fourth time, unable to swallow. Her neck had turned black.
The doctors immediately put her in an ambulance and rushed her to a
nearby university hospital only 35 minutes away where she was given an
IV and the tooth was removed. Two days later, she died. The cause of
death was listed as sepsis from an infected tooth derived from a
condition called Ludwig's Angina. As is typical in U.S. medical
schools, the hospital doctors had not received even limited training in
oral health, which may have contributed to Jade's death. Her mother and
husband of 1 year, who are in therapy, proclaimed, ``If they'd only
told us that a tooth infection could kill my daughter.''
There is a need to bring attention to the social determinants of
health and begin the process of educating not only patients, but the
community and all health professionals on what is needed for
sustainability and longevity of our oral and systemic health.
PREVENTION:
RAM represents an immediate short-term solution to a long-term
problem. It creates a community template that could potentially become
a sustainable entity. Prevention is the long-term solution. When the
community begins to provide health access, care, and education for
marginalized communities, the potential for that community to become
healthier and more productive is attainable. RAM essentially provides a
blueprint for change and positive impact.
RAM clinics go where they are invited. Volunteers from that
community, are mobilized to provide the staffing services, which
includes processing of patients, dispensing of medications and related
information, controlling the influx of patients, sterilization of
instruments, and most importantly greeting patients at the entrance
with a warm and welcoming hello. Due to the lack of portability of
licensed providers, sometimes services are hindered. There is often a
lack of state-licensed healthcare providers in a given community. If we
were able to open the doors to healthcare providers licensed in
neighboring states, it would save time and more patients could be
treated. A possible solution to this would be to allow temporary
licenses for voluntary dentists, hygienists, and assistants.
My Own Experience with RAM
From my own experience working onsite, the first encounter between
a RAM volunteer or provider and the patient, is most important. That
moment is where the healing begins. I've had several encounters with
patients who are overjoyed to see their smiles for the first time in
years, or even to get a tooth or teeth pulled after a long battle of
aches and pains.
Farmer's Story
I had a patient who was a disabled farmer, as it is the second most
dangerous profession in America. He'd driven across 3 states to get to
us. He was self-conscious about possibly having an odor due to sleeping
in his car. He needed to have several broken teeth removed and a few
teeth filled. We anesthetized him and used a technique that made the
injection relatively painless. He seemed surprised; his worry and fear
around this visit had dissipated. We didn't have to pull as many teeth
as he thought. He was happy that some of his teeth could be saved. When
the procedure was over, he shook my hand. He was so grateful that he
had such a good encounter that he offered up a prayer to give thanks
for the experience. He said he appreciated being validated and not
condemned. We all shed a tear.
Human Connection
When a human being comes to these clinics for treatment, most often
to escape pain or discomfort, and is treated with respect in the
process, immense gratitude is felt. But not just for the patient, for
everyone involved. We all receive a blessing in this exchange and in
this work.
______

Greetings Chairman Sanders, Ranking Member Bill Cassidy, M.D., and
Members of the HELP Committee. Thank you for this opportunity to appear
before this Committee to discuss the results of oral health shortages
in The United States of America.
My name is Brian Jeffery Swann, testifying today as a public health
trained Oral Physician practicing in Tennessee, North Carolina, and
Massachusetts. My primary residence is in east Tennessee in a small
town called Greenback, not far from where I was born. When I was 7
years old, my family moved to California. Starting as a cleaning lady
for affluent white families, my mother eventually enrolled and
completed dental assisting courses. At age twelve, I had my first
dental visit with my mother's employer, the only Black dentist in the
area. He diagnosed me with 13 cavities all in need of intervention. I
often ponder my complex pathway to oral health care and the sometimes
torturous or frankly impossible path many in this country are forced to
navigate in search of dental care.
Today, I serve on the board of Remote Area Medicine (RAM), as well
as co-chair of the committee on global outreach for the National Dental
Association. RAM is a major nonprofit provider of free pop-up medical
clinics. The mission is to prevent pain and alleviate suffering by
providing free dental, vision, and medical services to undeserved and
uninsured individuals. RAM's Corps of more than 212,700 Humanitarian
Volunteers along with licensed dental, vision, and medical
professionals have treated more than 940,700 individuals, delivering
over $200,000,000 worth of health care services. Today, RAM is nearing
its 1400th clinic. RAM also partners with other organizations striving
to make a positive change regarding access to care. One of the
organizations RAM partners with is The National Dental Association.
The people that come to RAM for assistance, often drive across 2 or
3 states, sleeping in their cars, and wrapped in blankets to stay warm.
Many people come days before the clinic opens, just to insure they
receive a ticket. Patients suffer from cavities as well as gum disease,
concerning due to the interplay of gum disease and Type 2 Diabetes. No
where can the necessity of RAM be seen more than in the story of Jade.
Jade was a 27-year-old, Appalachian woman with a history of type 2
diabetes that led to placement of a port after 2/3 of her right lung
was removed. She developed swelling called cellulitis under her chin
and neck region from a decayed and infected lower molar. Due to the
swelling and pain and lacking a dental home, she did what many patients
do and visited the emergency department at the local hospital for care.
She was given antibiotics and pain medication in the form of pills and
told to seek dental care. She went to the dentist (who had recently
extracted all her mother's teeth) and was told that $900 was the cost
to remove the one offending tooth. Not having the cash, she decided to
wait for an anticipated refund check. The following month the swelling
had advanced, and she was prescribed more of the same medications which
alleviated symptoms but did not treat the problem. In the 3rd month she
contracted COVID which impaired her breathing even more. Jade was given
yet more antibiotics and pain medication which she could no longer
swallow. The following month, she returned to the hospital a fourth
time, unable to swallow. Her neck had turned black. The doctors
immediately put her in an ambulance and rushed her to a nearby
university hospital only 35 minutes away where she was given an IV and
the tooth was removed. Two days later, she died. The cause of death was
listed as sepsis from an infected tooth derived from a condition called
Ludwig's Angina. As is typical in U.S. medical schools, the hospital
doctors had not received even limited training in oral health, which
may have contributed to Jade's death. Her mother and husband of 1 year,
who are in therapy, proclaimed, ``If they'd only told us that a tooth
infection could kill my daughter.''
There is a need to bring attention to the social determinants of
health and begin the process of educating not only patients, but the
community and all health professionals on what is needed for
sustainability and longevity of our oral and systemic health.
RAM represents an immediate short-term solution to a long-term
problem.
What is the long-term solution?
1. Prevention
(a). Education: A high percentage of our patients have
a low health IQ, not understanding what's happening in
the oral cavity is connected to and may contribute to
what is happening in the rest of their body. Specific
dental health education should be provided to patients
during all medical touch points.
(b). Prevention: Increase in the number of states who
provide non-emergency adult Medicaid benefit.
2. RAM associated policy change.
(a). Allow temporary state licenses for voluntary work
which would apply to dentists, hygienists, and
assistants. This would resolve the dearth of state-
licensed healthcare providers and open the doors to
healthcare providers licensed in others states to
volunteer and provide care at RAM events.
I went into the dental field because of inspiration from my mother.
Over the years working with RAM, I have seen the deeply personal and
human connection. When a human being comes to these clinics for
treatment, most often to escape pain or discomfort, and is treated with
respect in the process, immense gratitude is felt. But not just for the
patient, for everyone involved. We all receive a blessing in this
exchange and in this work.
References:
Vujicic M, Fosse C, Reusch C, Burroughs M. Making the case for
adults in all state Medicaid programs.
Health Policy Institute White Paper. American Dental Association in
partnership with Community Catalyst and Families U.S.A. July 2021.
Available from: https://www.ada.org/-/media/project/ada-organization/
ada/ada-org/files/resources/research/hpi/whitepaper-0721.pdf.
______
The Chair. Dr. Swann, thank you very much. Senator Cassidy,
introduce the next witness.
Senator Cassidy. I'll allow Senator Tuberville to.
Senator Tuberville. Thank you, Senator Cassidy. It's my
honor today to introduce Dr. Gordon Isbell, from Gadsden,
Alabama. Dr. Isbell went to Auburn University for his
bachelor's degree and then to UAB for his degree in dental
medicine. And since 1981, he's been serving the people of
Gadsden area through his practice, Isbell Dental. Over the
years, Dr. Isbell has been very active with the Academy of
General Dentistry, and he served in a variety of leadership
roles with the organization, both at the state and National
level.
He was also president of the Alabama Dental Association
from 2017 to 2018. Dr. Isbell has had a distinguished career
full of honors and awards from entities across the State of
Alabama and across the country. He spent years advocating for
dentists, their patients, and their communities, and he's
managed to accomplish this all while raising five children with
his wife, Cindy, who is by the way, an Alabama graduate.

Today, Dr. Isbell will bring an important perspective to
this hearing. In that of a practicing dentist in a community
and state with many wide-ranging healthcare challenges. Dr.
Isbell provides charitable care to his community through his
involvement with Donated Dental Services Mission of Mercies and
Regional Access Mission programs. He will speak to the efforts
of private dentist across the country and their efforts to
reach underserved population.
Dr. Isbell, thank you for being here.
STATEMENT OF GORDON ROSWELL ISBELL, III, DMD, MAGD, PAST
TRUSTEE, ACADEMY OF GENERAL DENTISTRY, GADSDEN, AL
Dr. Isbell. Thank you, Senator Tuberville. Chairman
Sanders, Ranking Member Cassidy, thank you for the opportunity
to testify on behalf of the Academy of General Dentistry. The
AGD is the only professional association that exclusively
represents general dentist. The nation is paying more attention
to oral healthcare. Research continues to highlight the
importance of dental care, overall well-being, but also shows
the inequities in excess.
AGD is committed to addressing these inequities by
leveraging the abilities of private practice general dentists.
We must protect private practice dentistry and ensure the
longevity and resilience of the dental profession by supporting
fully trained and licensed dentist and comprehensive services
only they can provide.
I am Dr. Gordon Isbell and I've practiced general dentistry
for 43 years. My son and I practice together. My practice cares
for many underserved populations. It is a true honor to serve
so many of our veterans when they have difficulty receiving
care.
I have a daughter with spinal muscular atrophy and
understand the barriers that patients with disabilities face.
She lives her life in an electric wheelchair. It is up to the
provider community to come together to help.
Research estimates over 100 systemic diseases have oral
manifestations. Illnesses related to oral health result in 6.1
million days of bed disability, 12.7 million days of restricted
activity and 20.5 million lost work days each year. Most oral
health conditions are avoidable through the oral health
literacy, sound hygiene and preventative care.
Private practice dentists can detect and treat oral health
problems as early as possible, avoiding expensive emergency
room visits and complications that may rise from subsequent
medical conditions.
Yet, we are challenged with increased governmental
paperwork and regulations. Reimbursements have continually
decreased as the cost of doing business has escalated, making
it challenging for individual practitioners to provide care.
Workforce shortages remain a significant challenge.
All six of the hygienists in our practice are near
retirement age, but I'm here to talk about solutions. Foremost,
AGD care too deeply about ensuring every American has access to
oral healthcare and strives to ensure governmental policies are
properly targeted for optimal effectiveness. While AGD supports
Federal programs that increase access to care and address
disparities, it is important these programs fill the gaps that
truly exist.
We have written to HHS that the data used to calculate
health professional shortage areas may be out of date,
resulting in inaccurate information. Increasing governmental
services and locations already being served by private practice
can harm small independent dentists.
We must also address workforce strains. AGD strongly
supports the reauthorization of the Action for Dental Health,
which provides critical state grants to support dental health
workforce initiatives in areas with shortages.
We also support Title VII, which administers grants to both
postdoctoral dental programs, advanced dental education, and
offer loan repayments for dentists. Such grants play a pivotal
role in addressing the scarcity of dental school professors and
also diversity within our dental field. Our members feel the
dental insurance industry forces independent dentists into
unfair contracts.
The AGD urges Congress to pass the Doc Act, which would
prohibit dental insurers from acquiring providers to charge
patients a mandated fee for non-coverage services, over 40
states prohibit this practice.
The AGD sincerely thanks to Committee, especially Senator
Collins, for her efforts to include AGD as an improved provider
of continued education for prescribers of opioids, in the
reauthorization of the support act. The AGD also appreciates
Senator Lujan, and Senator Collins efforts on oral health
literacy and awareness act.
In conclusion, advancing access to the delivery of oral
healthcare to all will require swift intentional action.
Progress will require partnership. And we urge your support for
policies that prioritize oral health, well-being, in
conjunction with the dental profession, including private,
independent practices.
AGD strongly believes every person deserves a dental home
and access to routine, safe, reliable, quality, oral healthcare
provided by trained and licensed professionals led by dentists.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before the Committee
today, and I look forward to your questions.

prepared statement of gordon isbell
Chairman Sanders, Ranking Member Cassidy, and Members of the
Committee: I thank you for the opportunity to testify before you on
behalf of the Academy of General Dentistry (AGD) to discuss access to
and the issues facing the delivery of oral health care in the United
States. The AGD is the only professional association that exclusively
represents the needs and interests of general dentists, advancing
general dentistry through quality continuing education and advocacy.
The AGD provides its more than 40,000 members with the resources and
support to provide the best dental care and oral health education.
The good news is that the Nation is paying more attention to oral
health. Research continues to highlight the importance of dental care
to overall well-being, but also shows the inequities in access to
dental care. The AGD is committed to addressing these inequities by
leveraging the abilities of private practice general dentists. I
recognize that the Committee has a broad jurisdiction with many
important issues to focus on, and so I applaud you for your focus on
oral health care. However, let me be clear, we must ensure that the
private practice of dentistry is protected and that in our efforts to
find solutions to common problems, we do not diminish the care we
provide, make it harder to enter into and survive in private dental
practice, or dilute the level of services that only fully trained and
licensed dentists can and should provide.
I am Dr. Gordon Isbell, III. I have practiced general dentistry in
Gadsden, Alabama for 43 years. My son, Dr. Ross Isbell, and I have two
practices in Gadsden and have 20 employees. We are a small business and
a family restorative dental practice serving our patients and our
community.
We have strived during these years to stay state-of-the-art
technologically, as we believe our patients deserve to be treated with
the highest standard of care possible.
I have sought to hone my skills for my entire career and have
achieved Fellowships and Masterships in the AGD. I believe in the
importance of lifelong learning in our profession. I have also served
my profession as state president of the Alabama Academy of General
Dentistry and the Alabama Dental Association.
I have served in multiple capacities in organized dentistry from
Regional Director to Trustee of the AGD Board to serving as Chairman of
the American Dental Association's Council on Dental Practice, as well
roles in many state and local societies.
The AGD believes that every American should have access to oral
health care. Our practice cares for many underserved populations by
working to treat patients through Donated Dental Services, Mission of
Mercy, and Regional Access Missions programs. In particular, it has
been an honor to serve so many of our veterans that have needed oral
health care after they have served our Nation and kept us free when
they have had difficulty receiving all the care they need.
I have been a Physician Staff member at two local hospitals to help
with our special needs populations. Our practice treats special needs
patients as well as the elderly population in our community. I have a
daughter with Spinal Muscular Atrophy who lives in an electric
wheelchair, thus I understand and have lived knowing those with special
needs have barriers that must be understood and the provider community
as a whole must come together to help overcome these barriers to
access. I would note that in our practice, we have safety protocols for
our patients and staff. Our staff has access to emergency training
opportunities. General dentistry is here to serve our patients safely
and effectively.
Private practice dentists treat oral health care problems as early
as possible. This helps ensure that patients will not need to go to an
emergency room for treatment or develop subsequent medical issues. This
type of early treatment saves patients and the health system money and
improves overall health and quality of life for our fellow Americans.
This is why it is critical to protect private practice dentistry, as
only dentists can provide consistent, preventative oral health care and
serve these needs.
Small businesses, including general dentistry, are challenged with
increased governmental paperwork and regulations. Reimbursements have
continually decreased as the cost of doing business has escalated over
the past 43 years during my time practicing. These barriers make it
challenging for individual practitioners to continually serve our
citizens.
Additionally, workforce shortages are a continual challenge for
small businesses like mine in private practice dentistry. Finding
quality well-trained personnel to assist dentists in taking care of our
patient population has been an issue for years and has only been
exacerbated since COVID-19. Unfortunately, the outlook going forward is
not promising. All six of the hygienists in our practice are at or near
retirement age, but I am here to not just talk about challenges, but
solutions as well.
Introduction and Landscape
Oral Health is Critical to Overall Well-being
Studies have long documented the importance of an individual's oral
health to their overall well-being. One journal from 2017 stated ``the
oral cavity is the intersection of medicine and dentistry and the
window into the general health of a patient''. \1\ This holds true for
patients across their lifespan, from birth to early youth, to women who
are pregnant or postpartum, to those at the end of life. Research
estimates that over 100 systemic diseases have oral manifestations. \2\
For example, the Mayo Clinic states that poor oral health may
contribute to various diseases and conditions, including: (1)
endocarditis when bacteria from the mouth spreads through the
bloodstream; (2) cardiovascular disease which may be linked to
infections caused by oral bacteria; (3) birth complications; and (4)
pneumonia. Additionally, poor oral health can also be an indicator of
diseases such as diabetes, HIV/AIDS, osteoporosis, and Alzheimer's
disease. Research also shows other conditions that might be linked to
poor oral health, including eating disorders, poor nutritional intake,
rheumatoid arthritis, certain cancers, and immune system disorders. \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Patricia Alpert. Oral Health: The Oral-Systemic Health
Connection. SAGE Journals. https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/
10.1177/1084822316651658.
\2\ Shawn F. Kane. The Effects of Oral Health on Systemic Health.
General Dentistry Research Brief. https://www.agd.org/docs/default-
source/self-instruction-(gendent)/gendent-nd17-aafp-kane.pdf.
\3\ Mayo Clinic Staff. Oral Health: A Window to Your Overall
Health. May Clinic. https://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy-lifestyle/adult-
health/in-depth/dental/art-20047475.
Dentists like myself often identify illnesses and conditions before
they are diagnosed by a physician. Patients tend to visit their
dentists more regularly than their physicians. This may be due to the
fact that many medical issues are asymptomatic, and patients therefore
do not see a need to visit their physicians as frequently. Optimization
of a patient's health through both primary and dental health care can
alleviate many of these disease burdens on individuals and on the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
health care system as a whole.
Although dentistry accounts for just 4 percent of total national
health expenditures, \4\ dental health care can help prevent worsening
of certain illnesses and ultimately save costs to both the individual
patient and the overall health care system. For example, illnesses
related to oral health result in 6.1 million days of bed disability,
12.7 million days of restricted activity, and 20.5 million lost
workdays each year. \5\ Additionally, data indicates that costs
associated with emergency room visits for dental procedures may exceed
$2 billion per year. \6\ Therefore, it is important to note that unlike
medical treatments, the vast majority of oral health conditions are
avoidable through the prevention model of oral health literacy, sound
hygiene, and preventative care. Doing so will help the patient avoid
worsening health conditions and prevent them and the health care system
from incurring great costs. For example, general dentists can help
identify early signs of tooth decay, which can help patients avoid
developing cavities or infections which can be costly and painful to
treat. If patients develop oral infections, particularly those with
preexisting conditions such as diabetes or certain cardiovascular
conditions, they can experience severe health complications that result
in emergency room visits.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. National Health
Expenditures 2017 Highlights. https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-
Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/
NationalHealthExpendData/downloads/highlights.pdf.
\5\ U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Oral Health in
America: A Report of the Surgeon General. U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, National Institutes of Health, National Institute of
Dental and Craniofacial Research, 2000. NIH publication 00-4713.
https://www.nidcr.nih.gov/sites/default/files/201710/
hck1ocv%40www.surgeon.fullrpt.pdf.
\6\ Owens, P., Manski, R., Weiss, A., Emergency Department Visits
Involving Dental Conditions, 2018. Agency for Healthcare Research and
Quality, Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project, Statistical Brief
#280, August 2021. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK574495/pdf/
Bookshelf-NBK574495.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Challenges Facing Dentistry and Oral Health
Given the importance of oral health to the Nation's overall health
and well-being, it is critical to address the numerous challenges
facing dentistry. As I will discuss in greater detail later in my
testimony, some of the biggest challenges in dentistry include
inadequate access to oral health care, workforce shortages, significant
dental student loan debt, low reimbursement from government programs,
and anti-competitive insurance and governmental practices.
The AGD cares deeply about ensuring that every American has access
to oral health care. Good oral health care is critical to peoples'
health and well-being. Unfortunately, many communities lack access to
oral health care services, especially those in rural and underserved
communities and those individuals without insurance.
Inadequate access to dental care is further exacerbated by the
acute workforce issues plaguing the dental profession. There are severe
dental auxiliary shortages across the country, particularly in rural
and underserved areas. Furthermore, due to the dental student loan
crisis, many dentists are forced to practice in specific geographic
areas to make ends meet. Without policies that support the dental
workforce, dentists are unable to provide care for their patients and
access to care is reduced. This leaves the patients who are most in
need of care without sufficient access to dental providers.
Dentists are committed to serving each and every individual with
the best possible care, but simply are unable to because of a lack of
adequate policy. Policies that may help advance access to care include
supporting increasing the workforce and improving oral health literacy.
These policy proposals will be discussed later in this testimony.
Finally, the private dental insurance industry is increasingly
putting heightened pressure on dentists and patients through anti-
competitive insurance tactics and inadequate reimbursement. Notably,
insurance companies often force dentists to charge patients the maximum
fee for ``non-covered'' services, rather than allowing dentists to
charge patients a usual and customary fee. This practice harms the
critical relationships between patients and dentists, and forces
private-pay patients to absorb the additional out-of-pocket costs
incurred by the dentist.
To address these challenges and more, the AGD supports a variety of
policy solutions to enhance access to oral health services, strengthen
the dental workforce, and promote small and independent dental practice
owners.
Priority Issues of Concern
In addition to ensuring access to dental health care and
strengthening the private practice of dentistry, the AGD would also
like to bring focus to four priorities we urge this Committee, and
Congress, to act on:
I. Supporting increased workforce in dentistry
II. Promoting equitable relationships between dentists and
insurers
III. Including the AGD as an approved provider of opioid
training under the Medication Access and Training Expansion
(MATE) Act
IV. Promoting oral health literacy
The AGD cares deeply about ensuring every American has access to
oral health care. As discussed previously, oral health care is a
critical predictor and indicator of overall well-being. Unfortunately,
not everyone has access to dental health care, and these rates of
access are significantly worse for underserved populations. For
example, people who are located in rural areas, have lower incomes, and
are Hispanic and non-Hispanic Black are less likely to have had a
dental visit within the last year, according to 2019 data from the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). \7\ Additionally,
those without insurance are also less likely to seek or receive dental
health care. \8\ Further, a 2021 survey found that nearly half of all
Americans with insurance skipped a dental visit because of cost. \9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ AE Cha AE, RA Cohen. Urban-Rural Differences in Dental Care
Use Among Adults Aged 18-64. NCHS Data Brief, no 412. National Center
for Health Statistics. 2021. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/databriefs/
db412-H.pdf.
\8\ Chad D. Meyerhoefer, Irina Panovska, and Richard J. Manski.
Projections Of Dental Care Use Through 2026: Preventive Care to
Increase While Treatment Will Decline. Health Affairs. https://
www.healthaffairs.org/doi/10.1377/hlthaff.2016.0833.
\9\ Michelle Lambright Black. Nearly Half of Insured Americans
Skip Dental Visits, Procedures Due to Cost. Value Penguin. https://
www.valuepenguin.com/dental-survey.
That said, while the AGD supports Federal programs aimed at
addressing some of these disparities, such as community health centers
(CHC), and recognizes that they can help increase access to care, we
are concerned that increasing the number of CHCs where existing dental
practices are already serving a population harms these small and
independent dental practices. This unfair Federal subsidization of such
competition, including allowing the cherry picking of patients that
already have a dental home and coverage, can force existing practices
to close. There is also no guarantee that once private practice
dentists are forced out of an area, that federally subsidized sites can
care for the whole of the community. This, in turn, potentially worsens
the access issue that we all want to solve. Many dentists, myself
included, are small business owners and our independent practices are
critical to the communities we serve. The AGD recognizes that CHCs can
expand access to dental services in areas facing true workforce
shortages, but we must work together and in coordination to fill the
gaps that truly exist. We urge Congress and the Health Resources and
Services Administration (HRSA) to consider the impact that changes to
CHC policies and funding will have on the viability of independent
dental practices. Furthermore, the AGD strongly supports CHC boards
partnering with local dental societies in order to contract with
locally practicing dentists to more adequately identify and reach
underserved patients. In addition, the AGD has recently expressed
concern through formal written communication to HRSA that the data used
to calculate Health Professional Shortage Areas (HPSAs) may be out of
date and is not updated expeditiously, resulting in inaccurate
information and misallocation of needed resources. This inaccurate data
can contribute to the problem I noted earlier, of establishing CHCs in
areas where the need for them is not the greatest. I have attached the
letter to my testimony and we are happy to submit this letter for the
record.
I. Promoting a Strong Workforce
The AGD is deeply concerned about issues related to workforce
strains, particularly the student loan debt burden impacting our
members. Without policies that support the dental workforce, dentists
are unable to provide care for their patients. Thus, the AGD strongly
supports policies that will help the current workforce as well as the
pipeline of future workers.
For example, we support programs such as dental loan repayment
programs, which place new graduates in underserved areas. Dental
organizations also host large annual campaigns to fund care for
children from underserved communities.
We also support programs that help with student loan relief,
particularly for dentists practicing in underserved areas, and
workforce policies that will support staffing and operational needs of
dental practices. Let me be clear, all members of the dental team play
an important role in providing care, but nothing can substitute for the
training and skill required to become a dentist and any efforts to
substitute care by those with less training or qualifications only
increases the risk of harm and further complications to patients.
The AGD strongly supports the reauthorization of the Action for
Dental Health Act, which would reauthorize critical state grants to
support dental health workforce initiatives in areas with dental health
provider shortages from fiscal years (FY) 2024 to 2028. These grants
are managed by HRSA and provide $13.9 million in annual funding for
oral health workforce grants. Grants authorized by the Action for
Dental Health Act improve the oral health workforce's capacity and
increase access to dental health services. These grants are especially
important in rural and underserved areas that face severe workforce
shortages which affect access to dental care. Funding from these grants
could be used for a variety of important workforce initiatives,
including, but not limited to: (1) recruiting and retaining dental
professionals; (2) establishing or expanding dental residency programs
in coordination with accredited dental training institutions in states
without dental schools; (3) providing grants or low-interest and no-
interest loans to help dentists who participate in the Medicaid program
to establish or expand dental practices in geographic areas with dental
shortages; and (4) contributing to loan forgiveness and repayment
programs. The Action for Dental Health Act would support rural and
underserved communities by bolstering the oral health workforce in
these areas and improving access to crucial dental services.
Furthermore, the AGD supports Title VII of the Public Health
Services Act (PHSA). Section 748, entitled Training in General,
Pediatric, and Public Health Dentistry and Dental Hygiene, administers
grants through HRSA to bolster postdoctoral dental and dental hygiene
programs, advance dental education, and offer loan repayments for a
spectrum of dental specialties, including general dentistry. Such
grants play a pivotal role in broadening the accessibility of oral
health care services, especially in rural and underserved regions.
Moreover, Section 784 grants address the scarcity of dental school
professors by facilitating faculty loan repayment programs and
professional development courses. These initiatives also champion
diversity within the dental field through programs like the Health
Careers Opportunity Program (HCOP), Centers of Excellence (COE), and
Minority Faculty Fellowship Program (MFFP). Through fiscal year 2025,
HRSA commits an annual investment of $14 million to postdoctoral
training in general, pediatric, and public health dentistry residency
programs, aimed at fostering the evolution and enhancement of novel
care delivery models in underserved areas. The AGD strongly advocates
for the reauthorization of these pivotal programs well beyond 2025.
As in many sectors throughout the health care industry and beyond,
workforce strains among dentists were greatly exacerbated during the
COVID-19 pandemic. Some practices had many of their employees quit
during the pandemic due to the additional stress and fear resulting
from the virus. Stressors and strains on the workforce like this
ultimately decrease access to oral health care and exacerbate the
burden on dental practices.
Additionally, the AGD strongly supports solutions to address the
dental student loan crisis, including through the Resident Education
Deferred Interest (REDI) Act. The average dental school student
graduates with over $262,000 in debt. With dental school tuition nearly
doubling since 2000, new dentists are faced with staggering amounts of
debt after graduation, which can limit their ability to choose a
preferred career path. Most dental students rely on Federal student
loans to finance their education. In addition, with the passage of the
Budget Control Act of 2011, graduate students lost access to federally
subsidized loans. Under this program, the Federal Government pays the
interest while students are in school, during a grace period, and
during periods of deferment. The loss of this benefit has increased the
debt burden on graduate and professional students, including dental
students.
Unfortunately, education costs can be a disincentive to practicing
in underserved areas after graduation. The REDI Act would bolster the
workforce and increase access to care by allowing dental and medical
students to defer their student loans interest-free while working in an
internship or residency program. Dentists frequently earn modest
salaries during their residency, while their student loan debt rapidly
increases due to accruing interest. The REDI Act would allow more
dentists to practice in underserved or rural areas where salaries may
be lower.
Some argue that to address access to care issues, we need to create
a new mid-level dental provider. The AGD disagrees. Oral health will
not be optimized by introducing a less-educated practitioner who is
authorized to perform non-reversible surgical procedures. This model
will create a system where those with more critical oral and medical
health issues will be treated by practitioners with less training.
Enacting policies, like those outlined above, to eliminate
disincentives to practice in underserved areas will allow citizens to
find a dental home led by a general dentist. The AGD looks forward to
working with the Committee to reach that common goal.
II. Equitable Insurance Practices
Many dentists, myself included, independently own our small dental
practices. Independent dental practices are integral to the communities
we serve, especially in rural and underserved areas that have limited
access to providers. Unfortunately, we have regularly heard from
members who feel the dental insurance industry forces independent
dentists into unfair contracts that harm their practices and their
patients. Currently, dental insurers often require providers to charge
patients the maximum fee for non-covered services, rather than allowing
dentists to charge patients a usual and customary amount for non-
covered services, or independently negotiating a price with the
patient. This practice, known as fee capping, disrupts long-standing
patient-dentist relationships and forces private-pay patients to absorb
the additional costs incurred by the dentist.
It is also incredibly challenging for small, independent dental
practices to negotiate with large, consolidated dental insurance
companies as the two negotiating parties are on vastly unequal playing
fields. This is especially problematic in communities with a limited
number of dental insurers, as providers are forced to accept contracts
that may disadvantage their practices and their patients. The AGD urges
Congress to pass the Dental and Optometric Care Access Act of 2023 (DOC
Access Act), which would prohibit fee capping. This practice also
relieves carriers' obligation to provide coverage for a wider range of
services. Dentists and patients should be allowed to agree on payment
terms that fit the patient's needs, while allowing the dentist to
operate a successful practice and provide the best possible care. While
over 40 states have enacted legislation prohibiting this practice, many
plans are regulated federally and can circumvent these protections. The
DOC Access Act is critical to banning fee capping at a Federal level.
The bill would allow providers to charge a fair and customary amount
for non-covered services rather than be subjected to an insurer's
mandated fee schedule. The DOC Access Act would promote fairness in
contracts between providers and insurers, increase the quality of care
for patients, and protect consumers from anti-competitive practices.
III. Safe Opioid Prescribing Practices
The AGD sincerely thanks the Chair and Ranking Member, as well as
Senator Collins on this Committee and Senator Bennet, for their efforts
to include the AGD as an approved training provider for prescribers of
opioids in the reauthorization of the Substance Use-Disorder Prevention
that Promotes Opioid Recovery and Treatment for Patients and
Communities Act (SUPPORT Act). This training, as required by the MATE
Act, is essential to educate providers on safe opioid prescribing
practices. We especially appreciate Senator Collins' tireless work to
ensure that general dentists can readily access essential prescribing
training.
The AGD recognizes that the dire opioid epidemic continues to
plague American communities. Recent studies have found that while
opioid prescribing by dentists is decreasing, \10\ dentists still
prescribe 8.6 percent of all opioids. \11\ As general dentists continue
to prescribe opioids for pain management, the AGD will continue to
educate them on safe opioid prescribing, opioid addiction, and
alternative treatment options that may be used.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ H. Yan Connie et al, Trends in Opioid Prescribing by General
Dentists and Dental Specialists in the United States, 2012-2019. Am J
Prev Med. 2022 Jul; 63(1): 3-12. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC9233039/.
\11\ Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center
for Injury Prevention and Control. Dental Pain Care. https://
www.cdc.gov/opioids/healthcare-professionals/prescribing/dental-
pain.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
IV. Oral Health Literacy
In addition, the AGD greatly appreciates Senator Lujan's and
Senator Collins' efforts on the Oral Health Literacy and Awareness Act
of 2023. We strongly believe that by improving oral health literacy, we
further everyone's access to dental health care, particularly among
underrepresented populations including rural populations.
Unfortunately, studies show that dental care visits declined
drastically during the early phases of the COVID-19 pandemic, and
although they have rebounded since, rates of dental care visits remain
below pre-pandemic levels. \12\ Further, some populations require more
regular or intensive visits to their dentists but are unaware of this
need or the consequences of foregoing this care. For example, pregnant
women may experience worse oral health due to hormonal fluctuations,
and it is critical they see their dentist regularly to ensure any
infection does not pass onto the fetus. Other barriers to access and
utilization that patients report include transportation issues, lack of
oral health literacy, \13\ fear, and anxiety. In summary, educating the
public about the importance of maintaining good oral health should be a
top concern--as oral disease left untreated can result in pain,
disfigurement, loss of school and workdays, nutrition problems,
expensive emergency room use for preventable dental conditions, and
even death.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Ashley M. Kranz, Annie Chen, Grace Gahlon, and Bradley D.
Stein. 2020 Trends in Dental Office Visits During the COVID-19
Pandemic. The Journal of the American Dental Association. https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7942140/.
\13\ Institute of Medicine, Board on Population Health and Public
Practice. Oral Health Literacy. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
NBK207122/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conclusion
The AGD continues to advance its mission to promote and advance
oral health for all by advocating for improved oral health literacy and
a regulatory environment that supports general dentists' practice of
primary oral health care. In conclusion, successfully advancing access
to, and delivery of, oral health care to all Americans will require
swift and intentional action. This action will need to support both the
workforce, so they are able to care for patients across the United
States regardless of where they are located or patients' ability to
pay, and the patients, by educating them on the importance of healthy
oral habits and expanding their access to care. Progress will require
partnership across all stakeholders, including government and industry,
and we urge your support for policies that prioritize oral health and
well-being in conjunction with the dental profession across all
practice locations, including private, independent practice. The AGD
strongly believes every person deserves a dental home and access to
routine, safe, reliable, and quality oral health care provided by
trained and licensed professionals, led by dentists.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before the Committee today,
and I look forward to your questions.
______

Chairman Sanders, Ranking Member Cassidy, and Members of the
Committee: I thank you for the opportunity to testify before you on
behalf of the Academy of General Dentistry (AGD) to discuss access to
and the issues facing the delivery of oral health care in the United
States. The AGD is the only professional association that exclusively
represents the needs and interests of general dentists, advancing
general dentistry through quality continuing education and advocacy.
The AGD provides its more than 40,000 members with the resources and
support to provide the best dental care and oral health education.
My name is Dr. Gordon Isbell, III. I have practiced general
dentistry in Gadsden, Alabama for 43 years. My son, Dr. Ross Isbell,
and I have two practices in Gadsden and have 20 employees. We are a
small business and a family restorative dental practice serving our
patients and our community. We strive to stay state-of-the-art
technologically, as we believe our patients deserve to be treated with
the highest standard of care possible. I have sought to hone my skills
for my entire career and have achieved Fellowships and Masterships in
the AGD. Additionally, I have served my profession as state president
of the Alabama Academy of General Dentistry and the Alabama Dental
Association. I have also served in multiple capacities in organized
dentistry from Regional Director to Trustee of the AGD Board to serving
as Chairman of the American Dental Association's Council on Dental
Practice, as well roles in many state and local societies.
Research continues to highlight the importance of dental care to
overall well-being, but also shows the inequities in access to dental
care. The AGD is committed to addressing these inequities by leveraging
the abilities of private practice general dentists. Our practice cares
for many underserved populations by working to treat patients through
Donated Dental Services, Mission of Mercy, and Regional Access Missions
programs. Successfully advancing access to, and delivery of, oral
health care to all Americans will require swift and intentional action
for both the workforce, so they are able to care for patients across
the United States regardless of where they are located or patients'
ability to pay, and patients, by educating them on the importance of
healthy oral habits and expanding their access to care. Progress will
require partnership across all stakeholders, including government and
industry. The AGD supports legislation to advance these aims, including
the Dental and Optometric Care Access Act of 2023 (DOC Access Act), the
Substance Use-Disorder Prevention that Promotes Opioid Recovery and
Treatment for Patients and Communities Act (SUPPORT Act), and the Oral
Health Literacy and Awareness Act of 2023. We urge your support for
policies that prioritize oral health and well-being in conjunction with
the dental profession across all practice locations, including private,
independent practice.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before the Committee today,
and I look forward to your questions.
______
The Chair. Dr. Isbell, thank you very much for your
testimony and for your work. I think every one of the panelists
has indicated that we have a serious dental crisis in America.
You've all made the connection between dental health and
physical health.
Let me start off with a simple question. In the richest
country, in the history of the world, why are we experiencing
the kind of dental crisis that we have, where tens and tens of
millions of people, can't afford to go to a dentist? Can't find
a dentist, or if they do find a dentist, there are waiting
lists for 6 months or a year. That's the crisis. How do we
solve it? Dr. Simon?
Dr. Simon. Dentistry has been separated from medicine since
the first dental school was founded in Maryland in the 1840's.
And since then, the separation of medicine and dentistry has
spun off and continued to cause problems. By the way, it's
upheld within our insurance structures, our education system,
and the ways healthcare is delivered. When things are separate,
it makes it harder to get through a second door. Americans
already struggle to get healthcare in the first place. If we
make it that they have to walk through one door and get to a
smaller locked one, they are going to have a hard time moving
in.
The Chair. Bottom line is dental care is healthcare and
should be available to all as a right.
Dr. Simon. Dental care is healthcare and healthcare is a
human right. Okay.
The Chair. Dr. Minter-Jordan, what's your thoughts?
Dr. Minter-Jordan. I think there's been a lack of
recognition of the cost savings that we could have if we were
able to integrate oral health and medical, and certainly agree
with Dr. Simon. We know, again, that periodontal treatment for
people with diabetes has been shown to reduce overall health
costs, and Medicare, we know that there's a potential to save
up to $14 billion annually by providing appropriate oral
healthcare with people with diabetes, with heart disease, we
could save almost $30 million.
The Chair. Let me jump in. We've heard this story a
thousand times.
Dr. Minter-Jordan. That's correct.
The Chair. That, what did you say, Senator Cassidy? An
ounce of prevention, cure for all. We hear this over and over
again. We're pretty good at spending zillions of dollars,
treating people on death's door, but we don't prevent the
cavities that little kids have.
Dr. Minter-Jordan. That's right.
The Chair. Dr. Swann.
Dr. Swann. Well, I agree with the prevention issue. We also
start looking at the fact that if we have to train across
disciplines, everybody should know what the risk factors are.
There should be no entity that's not advocating for healthy
societies. So, we need to put our money where our mouth is.
The Chair. Dr. Isbell.
Dr. Isbell. Senator, all I can tell you is what we do in
our world. We have free clinics in our practice and have for
many years, and now we have a free clinic in our town. We work
with RAM, and I applaud Dr. Swann, for his RAM program. We were
there to take care of our people.
I'll tell you about a student that came, who was going to
nursing school. All of her front teeth were rotten. She came
and was concerned and whatever. So we rebuilt her mouth. We did
it. She went to nursing school and a successful practitioner
today. We did it for her for nothing. And dentists do that all
over the country. And you're not telling that story, Senator.
Because there are dentists that are out there that are helping
people and there is more. There's always more.
The Chair. I'm saying, doctor, there certainly are, and I
thank you very much for what you do. And many dentists do it.
We have a crisis. Millions of people cannot find a dentist,
cannot afford dental care. I don't think that is under debate.
I think that's the reality.
Let me ask all of you another question, and I was kind of
shocked to learn this a few years ago. I talked to dentists who
have graduated dental school, $300,000-$400,000 in debt. So, we
talk about not getting dentists out into rural areas, lower
income areas. It's hard to make money in lower income areas.
What does the cost of dental school and dental school debt have
impact where dentists go? Dr. Simon.
Dr. Simon. The average dental school graduate graduates
with almost a hundred thousand dollars more debt than the
average medical school graduate around $300,000, as you say. I
think it absolutely influences where they practice.
The Chair. Okay. Yes, Dr. Minter-Jordan.
Dr. Minter-Jordan. I mean, I would agree with Dr. Simon.
There's a crisis as to how we can afford education and the
impact of the cost of education on the choices that
professionals make when they go to provide care. It certainly
impacts dentists and their ability to accept patients with
Medicaid because of the low reimbursement rates, as well as the
multifactorial costs that are inherent in having a dental
practice. So part of what we have to address is the use of
ancillary providers as well as a means of expanding access to
care.
The Chair. Dr. Swann.
Dr. Swann. I agree with the statements that have been made.
NYU's tuition right now for 4 years is $700,000, where the
medical school tuition is zero because of some donation. So, we
see these students getting out. I had talked with the young
doctors, been practicing 7 years, he's got $600,000 in debt,
he's frustrated. He doesn't know what to do. He can barely make
it.
I think that's one issue. Another issue is putting more
emphasis on reimbursement rates, especially around prevention.
The Chair. Dr. Isbell.
Dr. Isbell. Yes. I agree with that statement too. It's,
it's scary. The average right now, they say it's 262,000, but I
know many students with much higher than that. So, it's a
challenging situation. Then where do they go? The big deal is
to give them an opportunity into residencies.
If we could have some form, and there's legislation in
front of you to possibly, there could be just a halt on it--
They're not asking for forgiveness, they're asking for just to
be able to go to residency and train where they can have access
to care and treat patients. And they really, if we could
develop programs to get our dentist into rural areas, I know in
our state, that's something we've worked hard at and we're
having some success, but getting students from the beginning
that are planning to go back into the rural areas to take--
because our citizens deserve that. Senator.
The Chair. Well, let me just--my time has expired, but I
would also think not only if I graduated dental school with
hundreds of thousands debt, that's one thing. But if I'm a
young person, a working-class kid, thinking about going into
dental school, do I really want to go into a profession where I
am going to end up with 300--500,000 in debt? I suspect that's
a deterrent for a lot of young people going to dental school.
Is that right?--seeing head's being nodded here. Okay. My
time's expired. Senator Cassidy.
Senator Cassidy. Thank you all for being here. Dr. Isbell,
I'm also married to an Alabama grad, which I rarely mention on
the campaign trail, being from Louisiana, so something like
that.

She was a couple years after you at the UAB. I just had my
teeth done. And Senator Sanders talks about the expense. He
just touched on the cost of tuition. But I was amazed at the
technology in a dental office. They don't put the little x-rays
up as they did when I was a child. It's all digitalized, and I
can imagine it's fairly expensive.
I also understand it's a highly regulated industry. We want
to make sure it's sanitary, but there's a cost of compliance.
And then as you mentioned, there's workforce shortage, which I
presume that you pay the hygienist more. That hygienist was out
that day, so I had the dentist wife taking care of me, which we
had a great conversation.
All that to say like, what percent of a typical dentist
practice goes to overhead. And then if they're just out, and
Dr. Swann, you can answer this too, please. What percent of
their income would be dedicated toward paying back student
loans?
Dr. Isbell. That's a good question, Senator. Overhead has
increased exponentially over the last 43 years. The cost of
having quality individuals for my patients of all income levels
which we treat, the very poorest to the people that do better,
I want them to be able to understand the care they need. So, we
have intraoral cameras, we have monitors to be able to show
them what's there to where they can make choices to have
quality healthcare, every individual disorder.
Senator Cassidy. What percent of your like--like a dentist
back home told me that like he's got a 60 percent overhead.
Dr. Isbell. I think it's higher than that. I'd say 70
percent at this time.
Senator Cassidy. Is that, would that include the student
loan payments to go back?
Dr. Isbell. It does not.
Senator Cassidy. Being higher, Dr. Swann, would you kind of
agree with that?
Dr. Swann. Totally agree with that. It does not include
student loan payments. And people just getting out of school,
it's going to take them five to 7 years before they start
breaking even in business.
Senator Cassidy. I've never been to a dentist in Mexico,
but I could imagine they might still have those little x-rays
and not the digital that we've become familiar with. I just say
that because, there is a quality of care that you two provide,
which is quite remarkable.
Let me move on. Dr. Swann, if a hundred percent of an
average dentist payer mix was at Medicaid rates, could that
dentist stay in business?
Dr. Swann. Most likely not, but that dentist could mix it.
Senator Cassidy. I get that. So, it's a payer mix. Dr.
Isbell, well, you're actually in practice and Alabama's like
Louisiana. You've got a lot of poor folks. Do you see
pediatrics?
Dr. Isbell. We do.
Senator Cassidy. You got some Medicaid patients in there?
Dr. Isbell. We don't.
Senator Cassidy. You don't. If you had a hundred percent of
Medicaid, I'm suspecting that you could not keep your doors
open.
Dr. Isbell. We could not.
Senator Cassidy. Now, to point out Dr. Senator--I don't
know if I demoted you or elevated you. I was about to say Dr.
Sanders.
Senator Sanders sometimes refers to being poorly insured,
but that's a euphemism for Medicaid. I was just in California
and there's a hospital going out of business. They think
because they got so many Medi-Cal patients and Medi-Cal pay so
poorly. So I just want to point out that whenever we talk about
mandating through Medicaid, if you mandate the dentist to see
the patient, then you are going to end up with a bankrupt
dentist.
The other thing I've been told by private dentists, the
section of Baton Rouge, principally African-American has
African-American dentist. And they don't tell me this, but my
colleagues do, the folks that were my colleagues in our free
clinic for the working uninsured. That when a community health
center brought in dental services, they put those two dentists
out of business because they could, they basically had their
practice underwritten by the CHC, and they get a higher
Medicaid rate. They get 1.5 times.
These guys were saying we just lost two dentists in a bad
section. Poor section of town, bad dental healthcare do you
know what I'm trying to say. And so, is that a perverse effect
of the CHC? I'm not criticizing the CHC, I'm just kind of
pointing that out. What I've observed. Dr. Swann, your
thoughts?
Dr. Swann. Yes. I don't think it's necessarily a general
reverse effect. I think that's an isolated issue. What I do
feel in my practice, when I was doing private practice, I
looked at the demographics. 25 percent of the population was on
dental care. So, I accepted that we were able to make ends
meet. But it also meant building social capital.
Senator Cassidy. Well, you must have had another mix. You
had a better off patient with commercial insurance or able to
pay private dollars.
Dr. Swann. We had a mix.
Senator Cassidy. Because I'm suspecting your dental cow was
paying you below cost?
Dr. Swann. Right.
Senator Cassidy. Dr. Isbell.
Dr. Isbell. Yes. In that particular situation in our
community, it's called Quality of Health, our community health
center. And for 40 years I've worked with the dentist there.
They've co worked with our societies, and it's really been a
collegial situation. It's been wonderful for the citizens of
our community. And the dentist there have been helpful in our
free clinic that we've started also. And also building the
community. College programs mean working a workforce with
building dental assistants and hygienists there. So it can be
there together.
But I know other areas of our state where it didn't work so
well. And there were dentists that it was unfair competition,
and they basically end up closing and moving. So, it's
important to communicate, just like for you guys, it's about
communication. It's about sharing, but always, always putting
your patient first and taking care of your patients. And I
think the doctors here will agree with that.
Senator Cassidy. Thank you all. Thank you.
Senator Baldwin.
Senator Baldwin. Thank you, Chair Sanders, and Ranking
Member, for holding this hearing today. And to our witnesses, I
really appreciate your testimony. I want to sort of start where
Dr. Cassidy left off with a focus on community health centers.
Dr. Simon, I think you said in your testimony that's kind
of where you first started encountering some of the huge
challenges that we're discussing here today. And it seems to me
in Wisconsin that the community health centers and their dental
clinics are really stepping up and in various communities,
really helping create access that's affordable. Can you talk
about your experience in the role that community health centers
play in improving access to care for underserved populations?
Dr. Simon. Certainly, and I'm proud to do so alongside two
other former community health center clinicians. I think one
thing that community health centers can do is a matter of
scale, which is that if you are a dental department within a
health center, that provides not only medical care, but
pharmacy, all sorts of services, all of that administrative
burden that Dr. Isbell mentions, does not fall exclusively on
the backs of a few dentists. It's something that's distributed.
I think that makes it much more satisfying and meaningful
to practice dentistry because those sorts of concerns aren't
ones that you need to deal with alone.
On top of that, a federally qualified health center is
required to have at least 50 percent of its boards composed of
community members, which means that you are in direct service
to the community and listening to your neighbors and the people
that you are hoping to serve and following their lead. And I
will say that usually their lead includes dental care.
When it comes to the things we're able to do in a community
health center, it is very dependent currently on what state
Medicaid programs will cover. And while there is some amount of
free care or sliding scale care, it's almost always
insufficient. On top of that, there are not enough community
health centers and not enough community health center dentists.
So, the people who are trying to get in often can't.
When I was training in internal medicine residency, my
primary care clinic was at an FQHC in Boston the entire time. I
trained there all 3 years, our dental clinic was never able to
accept new patients, and none of my medical patients saw a
dentist at our FQHC, even though the dental clinic was down the
hall.
Senator Baldwin. Wow. Dr. Minter-Jordan you, you noted in
your testimony that maternal care and oral health are linked.
When a mother has poor oral health or can't access the dental
care she needs, she and her child may face worse health
outcomes. And I know our Country is currently facing a
maternity care crisis. What policies would you recommend to
improve maternal oral healthcare?
Dr. Minter-Jordan. Thank you for the question, Senator
Baldwin. Just as you've said we know that studies show that
periodontal treatment for pregnant women can result in a nearly
fourfold reduction in the rate of preterm delivery. We also
know that between 60 and 75 percent of pregnant people
experience oral healthcare issues that raise the likelihood of
major complications and poor birth outcomes.
One of the things that we did at the community health
center that I led in Boston, we led a centering pregnancy
program that incorporated our dentists into the program to
provide oral healthcare to pregnant mothers. So as from a
policy perspective, it would be important for maternal health
to be inclusive of oral health and to ensure that policies
support mom getting access to oral health during her pregnancy
and the education that goes along with that.
Senator Baldwin. Thank you. In this conversation, it's
important that we recognize that children must have access to
dental care at a young age to ensure a healthy life. One way to
improve access, which has happened in my home state, is to
provide school-based oral health prevention care. Dr. Simon,
how does reaching people where they are with programs in
schools or other community settings improve access and trust?
Dr. Simon. As I mentioned to Senator Sanders, I think a lot
about this in terms of making dentistry a separate door that's
harder to get through. And what you're describing is
eliminating that problem, not only in schools, but for adults
in nursing homes or homes for people with developmental
disabilities and inclusive of the pediatricians or primary care
physicians' office.
I give these talks a lot to my fellow primary care
physicians, and they're always so excited because right now
what they feel is helpless. They, like me, are seeing dental
patients and not able to do anything for them. So I think being
expansive, not only of our workforce, but also the things we
think about doing in various places are really important. Just
like what you described.
Senator Baldwin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chair. Thank you.
Senator Murkowski.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you
to the panelists. I'm sorry that I wasn't able to hear your
opening statements, but had an opportunity to look at the
background. I want to focus on access to oral health, dental
care in rural areas, because it's really hard.
I grew up in a part of the state where if you needed to go
to the dentist, you got in an airplane or you got on a ferry.
And more often than not, you went to Seattle. And that was not
a cheap trip, but that was how we got our healthcare. We have
improved dramatically since then, but we still have far too
many communities where access is an issue.
Far as I know, you can't fill a cavity through dental
through telehealth. And so, how we have been able to address
this requires a little bit of thinking outside the box.
The dental health aid therapist program, the DHAT program,
is something that we put in place in Alaska. We got a lot of
pushbacks from the American Dental association who thought that
this was going to be encroaching on their territory. And I
said, you send me all the dentists that you want to come out to
rural Alaska and for more than just a couple weeks stint,
because these kids don't need health dental care just 1 week or
2 weeks out of the year, we need somebody.
We'll take a mid-level, we'll take somebody who will work
with kids to encourage them on simple dental Hygienics. And so,
we have made some good progress, but there is still so, so much
more that we need to do to address access to dental care in our
rural communities.
I think Dr. Swann, you may have mentioned the DHAT Program,
but share with me, if you will, what more we can do, what more
we must do in our more rural and remote areas. Because we are
seeing overall health outcomes that have been impacted
negatively because it began with poor oral healthcare.
Dr. Swann. I agree with you. And I think that in the State
of Alaska, you've been a prime example, with a state that large
and being able to get a program that is seeing people. And I
read just last year, in the 10 or 12 years you've had this
program, there hasn't been one malpractice lawsuit. So, it's
working. And I think that we have to address those rural areas.
We need more role models in the schools of education where
we're teaching young people to become doctors. They need to see
people who are able to function and work in rural areas. And we
don't see that necessarily in our faculty. There needs to be
incentives. I think that would help people. And just really
innovative business models, General Practice Residency
Programs, GPR Programs, those type of programs. I think work
like in the State of New York where it's a requirement to get a
license that you spend 1 year doing public work. I think that
works. And I just think that the rural communities would
benefit from that.
Senator Murkowski. Other comments?
Dr. Minter-Jordan. Just to underscore and thank you Senator
Murkowski, for raising this. Just to underscore some of what
you said. Our research shows that over one third of rural
residents do not have dental insurance coverage. 4 in 10 adults
in rural areas have not seen a dentist in over a year, which is
about 10 percent higher than suburban and urban areas.
We also know that 67 percent of rural areas are health
professional shortage areas. And so, when I think about
solutions, it is generally what Dr. Swann has said in terms of
incentivizing providers, but also to your point, creating
greater opportunities for ancillary providers to provide
services in rural areas and expanding the scope of practice in
order to be able to do that.
Senator Murkowski. One of the things that we see is a great
disparity. I'm talking about rural, but so many of our rural
communities are predominantly Alaska native. And so, our native
population just suffers disproportionately when it comes to
negative health outcomes related to dental health.
It's not an issue of insurance. I can tell you, I go around
to the small regional or sub-regional clinics, and we will have
a dental chair, but it's practically brand spanking new, great
equipment because we can't get the providers that are out
there. So everything that we can be doing to focus on training
those who will take on, it's a challenge. It's hard. It's not
easy when you're moving around, when you really don't have the
place to stay in these small communities.
But it's an experience that ought to count for some level
of support for the training. And I would urge us all to think
about how we fully connect all these dots. It's one thing to
make it available with the chairs and the equipment. It's
another thing to get the providers that are out there, whether
they are the dentists or the mid-levels like we have with the
DHATs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chair. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Hassan.
Senator Hassan. Thanks so much, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to
you and Ranking Member Cassidy for this hearing. To our
witnesses, thank you all not only for being here, but for the
very important work that you do.
Dr. Swann, I want to start with a question to you. Just
taking a step back. A lack of affordable dental options can
result in patients skipping visits to the dentist, which can
ultimately lead to even more expensive long-term healthcare
challenges. So what is the impact on a patient's long-term oral
health when they skip regular visits to the dentist?
Dr. Swann. Well, we see that actually from COVID, the
problem exacerbates. It just gets worse. And so, therefore, the
amount of money that's going to take to save a tooth is going
to quadruple or it's going to end up with an extraction, which
has been the solution for a lot of people. Just take it out
because I have 28 or 32 of them, right?
Senator Hassan. Yes. Okay. So worse oral health, more
expensive remediation once they do come to the doctor.
Dr. Swann. Not just worse oral health, but systemic health.
Senator Hassan. Right. Okay. Dr. Minter-Jordan, some
employers don't offer dental benefits and Medicare and Medicaid
often provide little to no dental coverage for adults. As a
result, nearly 70 million adults in the United States don't
have dental coverage. Many families who have health insurers
through their employers want to purchase standalone dental
coverage through their state's insurance marketplace.
However, while this is possible with some state-run
marketplaces, depending on the design that the state decided to
use. Families can't purchase stand-alone dental coverage in New
Hampshire and the 31 other states that use the healthcare.gov
Federal marketplace.
Understanding that the dental programs that are on the
marketplace are vetted and people can actually compare what
coverage is actually there. What would be the impact of
allowing adults in New Hampshire and 31 other states to enroll
in standalone dental plans on healthcare.gov?
Dr. Minter-Jordan. Thank you, Senator Hassan for the
question. It is clear that when people have access to dental
coverage, they use it. And so, what we would expect from that
increased access through the marketplace and the ability for
individuals and families to purchase it through the
marketplace, is increased access to care, increased access to
prevention and reduction in overall healthcare costs, given the
correlation between oral health and overall health.
Senator Hassan. Well, thank you for that. I have a bill
with Senator Marshall, called the Increasing Access to Dental
Insurance Act. It has eight bipartisan co-sponsors, including
Senator Braun, which would help fix this problem, allowing
people across the country to access the vetted dental plans
offered on healthcare.gov.
Mr. Chairman, I know there's a markup next week that's
focused on reauthorizations, but I would just urge us to see if
we can fit this bill into an upcoming markup because it's a
straightforward way to improve coverage around the country.
Last, I wanted to just build on what Senator Murkowski was
talking about. Last year, New Hampshire expanded Medicaid
benefits to include dental coverage for adults. However, I'm
hearing, on a smaller scale, obviously, than Alaska, but New
Hampshire has its rural places too. It is still really hard for
people to find a dentist who takes Medicaid and is seeing new
patients, especially in rural areas of New Hampshire.
Dr. Simon, building on what the conversation you all just
were having with Senator Murkowski, what can we do to help
dentists practice in places where they are most needed?
Dr. Simon. As many people have said, of course, Medicaid
reimbursement is a big important issue for dentists trying to
care for Medicaid patients. But across the country, if you look
at the rates of Medicaid reimbursement in different states, it
is not correlated with the number of dentists who accept
Medicaid. So I would argue there's also something else going
on. Providing more funding is always great, but there has to be
a culture shift as well. To a certain extent, rural dentists
are graying. There are actually decreased rates of rural
dentists because dentists in my generation are less likely to
practice there.
I think that DHAT model is an amazing one that has shown
that listening to communities and letting them lead the way is
absolutely how we should be providing healthcare. And we know
that this can work in the lower 48 for sovereign tribal
communities, but also for Americans all over the place. We also
know that for private practice dentists who choose to work in
these areas, employing a dental therapist, can increase their
bottom line and allow them to care for more Medicaid
beneficiaries.
I think it's a very amazing free market solution to this
problem. On top of that, I would argue that having better
infrastructure in our community health centers and recruiting
more dental students from rural areas as the West Virginia has
done, does show that it can make a small dent in making these
communities better served.
Senator Hassan. Well, thank you very much for that. I have
talked to dentists in New Hampshire who are graying and want to
retire, but they don't know who's going to follow in their
practice. So they're keeping at it because they care about
their patients, but at some point, we have to find better ways
to solve this problem. So I thank you all for your work, and
thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chair. Senator Tuberville.
Senator Tuberville. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dr. Isbell, in
your professional opinion, what do you think are the driving
causes of skyrocketing health dental care costs in this
country? In your opinion, what's driving that?
Dr. Isbell. It is workforce, Senator. It's the cost of
competition. You will train somebody and then they're bought
down the street from somebody else. And just really keeping
individuals in our practice. We want quality healthcare, and
the cost of supplies, equipment, even at the basic level to
have, because our patients deserve quality care at all levels.
The cost of doing business today is tremendously different
than it used to be. Where reimbursement levels are very
different in our world today. So it is challenging to be able
to make it work today, to take care of our patients, and our
patients deserve quality. So we sit down with every patient,
spend time, we teach our patients. We believe so much in oral
health literacy and teaching patients from the bottom level,
getting involved in the schools and in every state.
I think it's important that we really educate people on the
need for oral healthcare. And I think all the panelists will
side with that. But the cost of doing business has gone up
tremendously, especially since COVID. It's really made it
challenging for practitioners to be able to--but we want to do
what's best for our patients. It's all about the patients,
always.
Senator Tuberville. To me too, it's about educating kids at
a younger age.
Dr. Isbell. Absolutely.
Senator Tuberville. I educated 130 kids a year from all
areas. And it's shocking to me, some kids that came from really
no household that had very little money, but they had perfect
teeth. A lot of it it's hereditary. It's got to be a lot of--
because they had nothing. They had no clue what a dentist was.
But then you have other people come in, it's just totally
different. And of course, a lot of that has to do with our
diet? So what can we do on a Federal level to incentivize more
people to get in the dentist business and hygiene business?
Dr. Isbell. I think it comes down to communication. I think
it comes down to educational process and giving people the
opportunity. But I think it comes to actually teaching at an
early level that the importance of dental care, and then it's a
profession that they can be proud of what they do. They get to
work with patients every day, and it's fulfilling what we do.
Like the story I told earlier of the young lady going to
nursing school with all of her front teeth decayed out, and we
built veneers and gave her a smile. The man that was in my
office on Monday, I practice dentistry every day. And the male
is in there 20 years. He hadn't been since COVID. Walked in. He
came, and got his teeth cleaned, and about our vintage. And 20
years ago, came in with his teeth rotted out, and he said, what
can I do?
We rebuilt his mouth 20 years ago, and he said, it's been
fantastic for 20 years. He said, my family's love it. He said,
I still feel good about my smile. I feel good about who I am.
And thank you so much for, yes, he's got some periodontal
issues, because that's partly genetic. That's partly he's 70
years old like I am. And that happens with time and age.
Senator Tuberville. Well, as you know, nobody likes to go
to the dentist though.
Dr. Isbell. No, sir.
Senator Tuberville. I'll be honest with you, I'm 2 months
late on my next cleaning, and I get a call every day.

That's just part of it. But Dr. Swann, what do you think?
What do we need to do federally to get more dentists? Have more
dentists? I know it costing a fortune now in our universities
that are gone up 800 percent in terms of tuition cost in the
last 10 years is ridiculous. But what do we need to do to get
more people involved?
Dr. Swann. I think the younger generation responds to
social media and there are ways in which you can start
educating people, as Dr. Harris said, to be able to catch them
at an earlier age, to talk about the pros and cons of being in
this profession.
We also need to make sure that we are training in more of
an interdisciplinary way. We need to work on our patients as a
team so that every entity of healthcare is actually promoting
optimal health.
We also need to think about the business of dentistry as
well as our patient's care. And sometimes they are interwoven,
sometimes they're separate. We need to bring that together. The
majority of dentists in America are general dentists, but 90
percent or more is private practices. That's fine, but it needs
to be a win-win situation.
If you took the State of Massachusetts that has 7,000
dentists, if each one of those just said, I will see five mass
health patients a year, just to say I'll do it. That would mean
that everybody along with the FQHCs would have a dental home.
Then if you cross train in medical schools, nursing
schools, and pharmacy schools about all the systemic illnesses
that come out of oral health, most medical nursing schools
don't do anything around oral health. We are trained in silos
and that's archaic. So there has to be a shift toward inclusion
and being able to make sure that as healthcare, that we are all
given the same message that is accurate. Its research proven,
and we are actually educating our patients about preventing
dental disease, which most of it can be prevented.
Senator Tuberville. Thank you.
The Chair. Senator Hickenlooper.
Senator Hickenlooper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank
all of you for being here. I had the funny experience of seeing
kind of a full circle. 52 years ago, I helped a kind of wild
rebellious young man named Mark Sally. Started a community
health center in Middletown, Connecticut, called the Community
Health Center, Inc. And he started with a single dentist. And
he had one afternoon a week, where people could come in and get
their teeth done from the low-income communities around north
Main Street in Middletown, Connecticut. And then he got two
afternoons a week. Now he's got 220 locations, I think. But
they don't have dental care everywhere. In other words, he's
that pendulum swung----

Let's stick to dentistry here. It's come round full circle
so that obviously we're not getting the appropriate level of
dental hygiene to our entire country. So, Dr. Simon, how can we
share best practices of what we've seen in health centers to
improve the integration of dental care with primary care and
expand access for patients?
Dr. Simon. I think we have a model for that, which is the
many large consolidated health systems that provide the bulk of
medical care in our Country. They employ vast numbers of
healthcare providers, but very rarely have dental providers as
part of that mix, even though they are receiving subsidies that
are related to oral healthcare. For example, for all of the
emergency department visits where by the way, Senator Cassidy,
you can't get a tooth extracted. The emergency department can't
even do that for you, for the most part.
Senator Cassidy. I got a friend that does it, but I'll
leave it.

Dr. Simon. That's amazing. I wish all EDs had that, but
most of them don't. So I think we have a lot of work to do of
using existing health infrastructure in a more efficient way.
If we could build a clinic into every hospital, that's one less
location people have to go to, to get their dental care.
They would note that while there are amazing private
practice physicians like Dr. Isbell, the younger generation of
dentists is more interested and more likely to work in
different locations. And I think a lot of young dentists would
jump at the chance to work alongside their medical colleagues
in a setting like that.
Senator Hickenlooper. Yes, I think you're exactly right.
And I think we should have a sense of urgency about this more
than what we see. And again Mr. Marcelli, was a community
organizer is how he got into this. But he was constantly
bringing together persuasive arguments about this.
One of the things I remember vividly 40 years ago at least
and Dr. Minter-Jordan, maybe I'll ask you as well, they saw and
heard alarming stories of kids from disadvantaged backgrounds
who had real self-image problems having to do with their dental
hygiene, and felt they didn't want to go to school. They didn't
feel comfortable in the neighborhood. Is there research on that
demonstrates how valuable that is?
Dr. Minter-Jordan. There is research that--and Senator
Hickenlooper, thank you so much for raising the very real fact
that there are so many children who go without oral health
disease prevention. And therefore, and I shared this story in
our opening, young children, as young as 3 years old, need to
be put under anesthesia in order to fix some of those cavities
that cannot be fixed in a dental chair.
They certainly impact their ability to participate in their
education, to feel, to have, self-esteem, and then as they
become adults, to be able to seek employment. I am so happy to
share additional information with your office on this important
topic. Just underscoring the real need for prevention and for
education.
Senator Hickenlooper. Thank you. And last question. All of
you have talked about the dental workforce shortage. And, and
what that means. I think Colorado's been working very hard to
lead in this effort to educate the next generation of dental
hygiene professionals. We've got Community College of Denver
and the Front Range Community College, Colorado Mountain
College, Peak Community College. I can go down the list of all
these institutions that committed to expand their programs by
2025, because we're asking them, we're reaching out and
providing some funding.
This is going to certainly help expand the workforce
capacity, especially in diverse and underserved communities.
But I'd love each of you, and I can just do this quickly
because I've only got 38 seconds. What else can we do to help
foster the growth of dental support professional programs like
the ones we're talking about in Colorado? At more schools, more
training programs, more states.
Dr. Simon. People have to believe that they can be in this
field. If they don't see anyone that looks like them or aren't
able to visit a dentist themselves, then they won't be able to.
When I was in dental school, I was one of the very few people
there that didn't have a parent who was a dentist. If that's
the only way you can enter this field, we are not going to do a
good job of diversifying it.
Dr. Minter-Jordan. I would quickly add, we need to continue
to remove the siloing between oral health and medical health,
and ensure that we're cross training and create the idea of
interdisciplinary teams that are focused on the patient and
their families.
Dr. Swann. We need to incentivize people from underserved
communities to actually go in to get the training to who are
culturally sensitive and return to those communities.
Dr. Isbell. We are doing that in Alabama. We're trying to
develop programs where students that are in high school from
rural areas. It's really hard if for this, even with a social
media, as Dr. Swann's mentioned, to get students once they've
gone to Birmingham, Atlanta or Nashville to dental school,
they've got student debt to get them to go back.
We have probably six counties in Alabama that there's some
of my guys that are still there, but there's not any young
dentists there. So really get them there. So really giving
opportunities from the financial base of it, of them going to
school with contracts, they understand what dentistry means and
why it's so important to the patients. Because those patients
in those areas deserve quality care is really important.
Then open access to when they're in our hospitals. Like I'm
serving two hospital staffs for 43 years, but guess what? All
the dental equipment's gone. It's dead. All my down syndrome,
all my special need, all my nursing home patients. Guess what?
There's not an operating room that I can go into for those very
apprehensive, for those very severe.
I have a daughter that lives in an electric wheelchair that
has SMAI understand disabilities, I understand barriers. So we
bring stretchers into our office and gas and Alabama with
ambulances bring them to us to take care of those people's
deserve care. But some of those people, it would be really
great if we worked across medical borders and we had an
opportunity to seal whether, one Friday a month or whatever to
see those patients general dentist are doing that. General
dentist have done that for 50 years. And general dentist can do
that in your state and mine, but that's not happening anymore.
But we've got to educate young people the importance of high
grade profession. Dentistry's a wonderful profession. I think
everybody needs.
Senator Hickenlooper. The Chairman is going to come down on
me. I'm already 2 minutes over, but anyway, I think this is one
of our best panels. Okay.
The Chair. Good. Thanks.
Senator Kaine.
Senator Kaine. Thanks, Chairman Sanders, thanks to the
panel. Dr. Swann, I want to talk to you about a part of the
world that you and I both love. You're from Appalachian,
Tennessee, and I appreciate your continued dedication to the
region. I'm going to be in Appalachian, Virginia tomorrow
visiting the Allegheny Highlands Dental Center, a dental center
that serves folks in Appalachia that we were able to receive a
significant congressionally directed expenditure to help them.
But in particular, I want to thank you for your work on
Remote Access Medical. So just to paint the picture for my
colleagues and those who are here. Remote Access Medical does
dental clinics and other medical clinics in remote areas. One
of the first sites that, and continuous sites, annual sites for
RAM is the Virginia Kentucky Fairgrounds in Wise County,
Virginia. And beginning when I was Lieutenant Governor, I would
often go to volunteer on this 3-day weekend of service.
What happens is people start arriving about Tuesday or
Wednesday to park their car in a dusty county fairgrounds
parking lot to get a number so that when it opens Friday
morning, they can go in and get medical care.
The first time I came, I was struck when I walked through
the parking lot, I would've expected to see vehicles from
Virginia and Kentucky and Tennessee and West Virginia and North
Carolina. But I was surprised to see vehicles with license
plates from Georgia and Florida and Alabama, and even Oklahoma
because low-income people at that point, beginning in 2002,
2003, had to drive that far to get medical care.
The clinic offers all kinds of medical care, but by far the
most significant usage of the clinic are folks who are seeking
dental care. And the most significant thing is teeth
extraction. If you just look at the bucket where the teeth are
extracted at the end of each day, I mean, it's just staggering
the number of people who have to drive state through state,
through state, just to have that happen.
The numbers of people going to the RAM Clinic declined when
Virginia embraced Medicare expansion, Medicaid expansion,
excuse me, that was positive. But because it's a border
community and many of the surrounding states haven't done
Medicaid expansion, there's still a lot of folks. But the
numbers didn't decline on the people coming to seek dental care
for a variety of reasons, dental care not being part of the
essential health benefits yet.
Virginia has embraced in 2022 a Medicaid expansion for
dental care. And Virginia has also done a salary supplement
under Medicaid for those who are serving. And yet still only 27
percent of our dentists except Medicaid patients.
It's clear that we have an awful lot to do. Medicaid
expansion has really helped the folks who came to that clinic
and come every year. But on the dental side, we need more
operations like the Allegheny Highland Center that I'm going to
tomorrow and others.
I just appreciate the role that RAM has played in this
safety net. It's kind of the first rung of the safety net and
then free clinics and community health centers.
But in the Nation, that's probably the most powerful and
wealthiest nation on the world, the fact that you'd have to
drive through three or four states and park in a dusty parking
lot and wait 3 days to get in line, so you can have your teeth
pulled. I mean, I was a missionary in Honduras when it was one
of the poorest countries in the western hemisphere next to
Haiti. This was in 1980 and 1981. And it's not that different
from what you might see in the dusty parking lot in Wise
County, Virginia, which is the area of the state that my wife
is from.
You said something Dr. Simon, I wanted to follow-up with
you on, which is, it's not just reimbursement, there's a
cultural thing. Because you're right, if Virginia, we embraced
Medicaid for dental services, we expanded it. And then the
legislature put more money into increased reimbursement rates,
and that's showing some success. But we still only have 27
percent of our dentists that accept Medicaid patients.
How do you view this cultural shift, any of you? And what,
what might we do in addition to reimbursement increases to try
to change that? I like who said, if we can just get each
dentist to take five Medicaid patients, right? And then that
plus the safety net would help. But what can we do?
Dr. Simon. I'd also point out that the 27 percent number
doesn't even paint the whole picture because only 5 percent of
Virginia dentists see more than a hundred Medicaid patients a
year. Yes. So you have an extraordinarily small workforce who's
really doing the work.
A hundred Medicaid patients is not very many when the
average dentist has a patient panel of 1,500-plus patients. So
really, it's an incredibly small group.
I think understanding from that group themselves, how
they're able to do that. I would imagine many of them work in
community health centers or other settings where they have sort
of more infrastructural support in order to provide this
amazing care. But understanding the dentists were able to do it
is probably the first thing.
The other thing, more big picture, would be to make a shift
between fee for service to a value-based care model. Right now,
dentists feel like they're not getting enough money for each
procedure they do. But patients would benefit if they didn't
need any procedures, and dentists make nothing if that's the
case. Yes. So, a model that aligns patient and provider
perspectives and lets dentists actually practice in a way
that's more meaningful and preventive focused, I think is also
part of that.
Senator Kaine. Other nations do that and they have much
better health outcome than we do. Any others that might want to
comment on this issue about the culture shift? If my Chairman
would enable me now that I'm over time to hear the answer.
Dr. Swann. Part of the culture shift is to shift more
toward prevention. But to be able to teach people how to
prevent disease and how disease are interacting with one
another really requires increasing health IQ, and it means that
you have to do it in a culturally sensitive way, even in
Appalachia.
That's a culture. And you have to be able to use that as a
way to be able to educate people about prevention. If we don't
do that, we're never going to be able to fix and put band-aids
on all these situations.
Senator Kaine. Dr. Minter-Jordan.
Dr. Minter-Jordan. I certainly would agree with everything
that's been said. The focus on prevention and increasing and
leveraging the use of ancillary providers within dental
practices so that the dentist is focused on working at the top
of their licensure and aided by ancillary providers in the
office that helps provide more Access to Medicaid patients.
Senator Kaine. Then Dr. Isbell.
Dr. Isbell. I think it comes down to education, Senator. I
think it's about treating every patient that we can. In a
practice like he's had, and I have, there's only so many
patients you can see.
One of my associates treats the patients in the jail. Who
wants to go do that? I mean, you, if you were a dentist, you're
not going to want to do that, but guess what? They deserve
care. How about our nursing home patients? We treat numerous
nursing home. We bring them in and stretchers into our office,
to take care of them. And many of our elder care, they're
coming in wheelchairs, but having the structure where it can be
there.
It gets down to how much you can do for our children. We
see so many of our children, we go into the grammar schools and
teach oral health literacy to our children, and then we send
brochures home to try to get to the parents. How do you get to
the parents? Because guess what? They weren't raised with that
Senator, and the parents don't understand.
It starts from the bottom level, teaching the child,
teaching the parent in every access that we can, to give them
an opportunity to understand what Dr. Swann, has said. If
there's so many things that we do in dentistry that by
education and getting on there with just simple prevention, we
can save so much for every family and prevent the catastrophic
stories that we're all telling.
Senator Kaine. Well, I appreciate your service, your
testimony, and thanks Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chair. I would be remiss Dr. Swann, not mentioning Stan
Brock. I met Stan. Well, Stan is the founder of RAM, I believe.
And when you talk Senator Kaine about those, I remember seeing
those photographs and it really, you're quite right, did not
look like this was taking place in America. And Stan did a
great job, I think, in raising consciousness of providing care
with that. Senator Cassidy, do you want to introduce something
into the record?
Senator Cassidy. First, I want to point out Dr. Swann, did
you notice that when Dr. Isbell said something earlier, like
our vintage, and he nodded toward you, that he was kind of
roping you into----
Dr. Isbell. He is probably younger than me.

A lot better looking too, but yes.
Dr. Swann. No, not, not really. But I am not younger than
you. Class of 1975, UCSF.
Senator Cassidy. Oh, wow. On behalf of Senator Paul, who
could not be here today, I ask unanimous consent that this
statement for the record from the American Dental Association,
be submitted into the record.
The Chair. Without objection. That ends our hearing. And I
want to thank each of our panelists. This is an enormously
important issue. You raise consciousness on it. I thank you all
very much for the work that you do personally and in advocating
the need for quality dental care for all.
For any Senators who wish to ask additional questions,
questions for the record will be due in 10 business days. I ask
anonymous consent to enter into the record five statements in
support of dental health.
[The following information can be found on page 58 in
Additional Material:]
The Chair. The Committee stands adjourned. Thanks again.
ADDITIONAL MATERIAL


