NO RIGHTS TO SPEAK OF: THE ECONOMIC HARMS OF RESTRICTING REPRODUCTIVE FREEDOM ======================================================================= HEARING before the COMMITTEE ON THE BUDGET UNITED STATES SENATE ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS SECOND SESSION __________ February 28, 2024 __________ Printed for use of the Committee on the Budget  www.govinfo.gov ______ U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE 55-276 WASHINGTON : 2024 COMMITTEE ON THE BUDGET SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island, Chairman PATTY MURRAY, Washington CHARLES E. GRASSLEY, Iowa RON WYDEN, Oregon MIKE CRAPO, Idaho DEBBIE STABENOW, Michigan LINDSEY O. GRAHAM, South Carolina BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont RON JOHNSON, Wisconsin MARK R. WARNER, Virginia MITT ROMNEY, Utah JEFF MERKLEY, Oregon ROGER MARSHALL, Kansas TIM KAINE, Virginia MIKE BRAUN, Indiana CHRIS VAN HOLLEN, Maryland JOHN KENNEDY, Louisiana BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico RICK SCOTT, Florida ALEX PADILLA, California MIKE LEE, Utah Dan Dudis, Majority Staff Director Kolan Davis, Republican Staff Director and Chief Counsel Mallory B. Nersesian, Chief Clerk Alexander C. Scioscia, Hearing Clerk C O N T E N T S ---------- WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 28, 2024 OPENING STATEMENTS BY COMMITTEE MEMBERS Page Senator Sheldon Whitehouse, Chairman............................. 1 Prepared Statement........................................... 35 Senator Charles E. Grassley...................................... 3 Prepared Statement........................................... 37 STATEMENTS BY COMMITTEE MEMBERS Senator Patty Murray............................................. 17 Senator John Kennedy............................................. 19 Senator Debbie Stabenow.......................................... 21 Senator Mike Lee................................................. 23 Senator Jeff Merkley............................................. 25 Senator Mike Braun............................................... 27 Senator Alex Padilla............................................. 28 Senator Tim Kaine................................................ 30 Senator Chris Van Hollen......................................... 32 WITNESSES Prof. Caitlin Myers, John G. McCullough Professor of Economics, Middlebury College............................................. 6 Prepared Statement........................................... 39 Dr. Leilah Zahedi-Spung, MD FACOG, Maternal Fetal Medicine, Complex Family Planning, Physicians for Reproductive Health.... 8 Prepared Statement........................................... 49 Mrs. Allie Phillips, Mom and Activist............................ 10 Prepared Statement........................................... 53 Mrs. Leslie Ford, Adjunct Fellow, Center on Opportunity and Social Mobility,............................................... American Enterprise Institute................................ 11 Prepared Statement........................................... 56 Mrs. Tamra Call, MSN, RN, Executive Director, Obria Medical Clinic......................................................... 13 Prepared Statement........................................... 62 APPENDIX Responses to post-hearing questions for the Record Mrs. Ford.................................................... 65 Chart submitted by Senator Kennedy............................... 120 Statement submitted for the Record by Intersections of Our Lives. 121 Statement submitted for the Record by Reproductive Freedom for All............................................................ 125 NO RIGHTS TO SPEAK OF: THE ECONOMIC HARMS OF RESTRICTING REPRODUCTIVE FREEDOM ---------- WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 28, 2024 Committee on the Budget, U.S. Senate, Washington, DC. The hearing was convened, pursuant to notice, at 10:00 a.m., in the Dirksen Senate Office Building, Room SD-608, Hon. Sheldon Whitehouse, Chairman of the Committee, presiding. Present: Senators Whitehouse, Murray, Wyden, Stabenow, Merkley, Kaine, Van Hollen, Padilla, Grassley, Braun, Kennedy, R. Scott, and Lee. Also present: Democratic Staff: Dan Dudis, Majority Staff Director; Melissa Kaplan-Pistiner, General Counsel. Republican Staff: Chris Conlin, Deputy Staff Director; Krisann Pearce, General Counsel; Ryan Flynn, Staff Assistant. Witnesses: Prof. Caitlin Myers, John G. McCullough Professor of Economics, Middlebury College Dr. Leilah Zahedi-Spung, MD FACOG, Maternal Fetal Medicine, Complex Family Planning, Physicians for Reproductive Health Mrs. Allie Phillips, Mom and Activist Mrs. Leslie Ford, Adjunct Fellow, Center on Opportunity and Social Mobility, American Enterprise Institute Mrs. Tamra Call, MSN, RN, Executive Director, Obria Medical Clinic, Ames, Iowa OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN WHITEHOUSE \1\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \1\ Prepared statement of Chairman Whitehouse appears in the appendix on page 35. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- Chairman Whitehouse. Good morning. I will call this session of the Senate Budget Committee to order. I have the permission from my distinguished Ranking Member's staff to proceed. We have multiple committees upon which we serve in the Senate and from time to time it's important to go check in at another committee to get in the queue properly. And so, Senator Grassley will be along. I will make my opening statement, yield to him, and then I'll introduce the first three witnesses. Senator Grassley will introduce a witness. Senator Lee will introduce a witness, and then we will proceed. We're here today to discuss women's rights. Their right to bodily autonomy, their right to set the course of their own life, and their right to economic freedom. I hear often that the Budget Committee should only be concerned with debt and deficits, but any serious conversation about debt and deficits must also analyze threats to economic growth and stability. Debt and deficits do not occur in a vacuum. They result from the fiscal decisions that we make and from what we do that strengthen or that weaken our economy. Reproductive rights, it turns out, are intrinsically tied to economic opportunity. Reproductive justice is economic justice. Restricting one restricts the other. As Professor Myers, the leading economist in this space, will testify today, we can measure the economic harms from dismantling Roe v. Wade, especially in already marginalized communities. The Dobbs decision triggered an immediate crisis for millions of women as antiquated state bans snapped back into place and some states implemented new restrictions on reproductive freedom. Our witnesses, Allie Phillips and Dr. Zahedi-Spung will explain how these Draconian state laws put patients, their families, and physicians into heartbreaking situations. About 25 million women of reproductive age live in states with severe restrictions on abortion. Most in states that failed to expend Medicaid and already had higher rates of maternal death. Black women are disproportionally affected, as many live in southern states with the worst restrictive policies, with existing structural barriers to care, and with already high rates of pregnancy-related complication and death. Doctors too lose their freedom to practice medicine as they are trained. Delivering patient-centered, evidence-based care. I hear from Rhode Island OB/GYNs about their colleagues in other states being put in impossible positions with the lives of women and babies put in jeopardy. For a great many reasons, often deeply personal and harrowing, one in four women seek an abortion before age 45, one in four. That freedom to decide if and when to have a child affects a woman's life trajectory and her family's financial security. As the pivotal Turnaway Study found, women denied an abortion who had to carry a pregnancy to term were four times more likely to live in poverty, and the reverse holds true too. Reproductive freedom and choice, including abortions and contraception, lowers maternal mortality, alleviates health risks, increases women's earnings, increases the probability that women attend college, and boosts local economies. Freedom turns out to have economic value. In Planned Parenthood v. Casey, these economic values were actually part of the Court's holding. The Court said the ability of women to participate equally in the economic and social life of the nation has been facilitated by their ability to control their reproductive lives. Economists and researchers have since quantified the damage of state abortion restrictions to local and state economies and the correlation is easy. The more extreme a state's restrictions the more its economy suffers. A new study estimates that state abortion restrictions cost the national economy, on average, $173 billion per year. In overturning Roe and Casey, a small right-wing majority of a captured Supreme Court inserted the government into the personal life decisions of millions of women, removing that freedom, never minding those consequences. This is a Court with members on a mission. This freedom fell at their hands. Next, maybe the freedom to take mifepristone, an abortion medication long proven safe and effective. Next, could come the freedom to use contraception, even in vitro fertilization is under the gun under the hands of right-wing extremists. A Republican led Congress and a second Trump Administration could mean a national abortion ban. If re-elected, Trump could abuse executive power to remove mifepristone from markets or try to prevent abortion medications or even contraceptives from going through the federal mail. The Republican effort to ban mail order medication could cause even larger economic damage than Dobbs. Generations of women fought for the freedom to make their own personal decisions. They fought and they won, and their victory brought economic gains, in which we all share. But now, extremists are trying to undo it all, leaving young women and girls in America with fewer rights than their grandmothers. Women and girls have lives worth respecting and protecting and no one should be forced to carry a pregnancy to term against their will. Stripping women of this freedom casts a long shadow over their lives and over their families' lives and it casts a long shadow over our economy as well. Congress should safeguard access to abortion and contraception and codify Roe into law. This is something women should decide. It's just not the government's business. And I will now turn it over to Ranking Member Grassley. Senator Grassley. Good morning, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Whitehouse. Good morning, sir. Senator Grassley. And I'm sorry I missed the last three hearings because I couldn't be here. Chairman Whitehouse. Well, it's great to have you back and to have you healthy enough to be back and participate in the hearings again, so bravo. OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR GRASSLEY \2\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \2\ Prepared statement of Senator Grassley appears in the appendix on page 37. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- Senator Grassley. Thank you. We're tackling a very serious topic this morning. Abortion, above all, is a moral and legal issue. Abortion is not an issue that lends itself to being looked at solely through an economic lens. After all, life is priceless. There's a reason this Committee historically hasn't delved into this issue. It's not an issue easily distilled down to dollars and cents typical of budget issues that this Committee normally works on. In fact, it is rather dehumanizing. The Chinese Communists are the best example of this when they instituted the one child policy, targeting female babies to extermination and they did this thinking it would help their economy, but looked what happened. Now, the Chinese realize it's backfiring and hurting the economy. I think right now we just saw statistics. They're no longer the largest population in the world after being supplanted by India. Look at Western nations like our own. We also realize we need more people to sustain the economy and protect Social Security. I guess that's one reason that we're the most immigrant welcoming nation by taking one million people legally every year into our country. So yes, having and raising children has cost, but so does abortion on the demand in a culture that lacks respect for life. That said, here we are. I'm pro-life, pro-family, pro- woman. These views are not in conflict. Worthy alternatives to abortion exist in all but the rarest of circumstances. Numerous programs at the federal, state, and local levels are available to help women, children, and families in need. To better assist families, Congress should focus on reforms that increase coordination between all the federal programs we have. Congress should simplify access to these programs. It should reduce duplication, promote work or education, and eliminate marriage penalties in our tax laws. For years, I've been championing supporting moms and kids. I've worked to support and improve our adoption and foster care systems. I've long been a strong supporter of tax incentives and laws to promote adoption and reduce financial burdens associated with adopting a child. As then chairman of the tax writing Finance Committee, now 20 years ago, I helped to shepherd the bipartisan tax relief package that included much needed update on the adoption tax credit. Additionally, I'm a member of the Congressional Coalition on Adoption and founder and co-chair of the Senate Caucus on Foster Youth and have worked for years to improve policies and support for those who open their hearts and homes to children in need. I'm also an advocate of the Maternal, Infant, and Early Childhood Home Visiting Program, which serves many mothers and children across Iowa and other states. It's critical that we support the most vulnerable in our society and this program has been a successful tool to improve the livelihoods of at-risk families. This Congress, I've introduced the bipartisan Healthy Moms and Babies Act with Senator Maggie Hassan. The bill is a culmination of my work as Finance Committee Chairman, where I solicit ideas from senators, stakeholders, including Iowa healthcare providers and advocates on ways to improve maternal and childcare. The public is debating many abortion issues, following the Supreme Court Dobbs decision. Today this Committee will hear from two witnesses who can tell us about the types of programs supporting pregnant women and families. We'll also hear how folks in our local communities stand by their neighbors to let them know that they aren't alone and do have options. That's a type of message everyone can get behind. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and thank all of our witnesses for appearing today. Chairman Whitehouse. Thank you, Senator Grassley, and again, welcome back. Our first witness today is Professor Caitlin Myers of Middleburg College. Professor Myers is an applied microeconomist who uses statistical methodologies to measure the causal effects of reproductive policies on demographic, health, and economic outcomes. Her work has been published in leading journals in economics and public policy. She maintains and distributes data on abortion access to researchers and the public through the Abortion Access Dashboard and Open Science Framework. Professor Myers, thank you very much for being here. Next, we will hear from Dr. Leilah Zahedi-Spung. Dr. Zahedi-Spung is a board-certified OB/GYN and maternal fetal medicine physician in Colorado. She received her bachelor's degree in Biology and Psychology from the University of Georgia and her medical degree from Emory University. She serves as a member of the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (SMFM) Productive Health Committee and a member of the Education Committee through the Society for Family Planning. Dr. Zahedi-Spung, welcome. Then we will hear from Mrs. Allie Phillips. Mrs. Phillips is a life-long Tennessean, a mother, and an activist. She shared her heart-breaking abortion story online and drew international attention. Turning her pain into passion, Mrs. Phillips has dedicated her time to speaking out and fighting back. Mrs. Phillips, we appreciate very much you taking the time to join us. And I will now turn to Senator Lee and Ranking Member Grassley, to introduce their witnesses. Senator Grassley. I have the privilege of introducing an Iowan from Story County, Iowa, Mrs. Tamra Call, Masters of Science in Nursing (MSN) and Registered Nurse (RN). She is Executive Director of the Obria Medical clinic in Ames, Iowa. Obria is a fully licensed community care clinic. It provides professional medical services, including consultations, well women care, pregnancy testing, ultrasound, health education and referrals. Obria employs board certified OB/GYN physicians, registered nurses, nurse practitioners, medical assistants, and support staff. Mrs. Call holds a bachelor's degree in Nursing and master's degree in Public Health Nursing from the University of Kansas. I'm also pleased to welcome Brece Call, Mrs. Call's daughter, to our hearing as well. Thank you both for being here. Chairman Whitehouse. Senator Lee, you have an introduction to make. STATEMENT OF SENATOR LEE Senator Lee. Yes. Thanks so much, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member Grassley. It's an honor and a privilege to be able to introduce my friend Leslie Ford as one of our witnesses today. Leslie's an Adjunct Fellow at the American Enterprise Institute's Center for Opportunity and Social Mobility and she's also the president of an entity called Ford Policy Solutions and a member of the State of Virginia's Department of Social Services State Board of Social Services, which is authorized to adopt and recommend policy solutions on various social programs within the Commonwealth of Virginia. She has personally served in the White House as a domestic policy advisor and a special assistant to the President from 2018 to 2020, working on reforms to social safety net programs and also for the Administration's antipoverty agenda. But most importantly, it is a great opportunity for me to introduce and endorse her because she's a former member of my staff. She's served as a policy advisor in my office where she oversaw a policy portfolio on health, education, labor, and pensions and worked on the development of a whole of health and social safety policy bills and amendments, helped put together groundbreaking legislation in a number of areas, including education reform, welfare reform, just to name a few. She has, of course, moved on and become a thought leader and someone who's contributed to meaningful and prudent welfare reforms and antipoverty measure and so I look forward to hearing from all of our witnesses, but especially Leslie Ford's. Thanks. Chairman Whitehouse. Thank you very much, Senator Lee. Dr. Myers, please proceed. STATEMENT OF PROFESSOR CAITLIN MYERS, JOHN G. MCCULLOUGH PROFESSOR OF ECONOMICS, MIDDLEBURY COLLEGE \3\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \3\ Prepared statement of Dr. Myers appears in the appendix on page 39. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- Dr. Myers. Chairman Whitehouse, Ranking Member Grassley, and members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today. My name is Caitlin Myers. I'm the John G. McCullough Professor of Economics at Middlebury College. As a labor economist, I study the causal effects of contraception and abortion access on economic outcomes. I'm not here as an activist. I'm here as a scientist presenting facts and evidence on the ways in which reproductive policy is also fundamentally economic policy. Women make up nearly half of the U.S. labor force. Their increased work hours and earnings since the late 1970s have boosted the U.S. economy by about 11 percent and prevented middle-class household incomes from stagnating. The decision of whether and when to become a mother is the single largest economic decision many women will make in their lifetimes. Men and women's earnings trend pretty similarly right up until the point of parenthood. But when they become mothers, women's earnings fall off a cliff, declining about 30 percent and opening a gender gap that persists, even after the kids grow up and leave the home. Much of this gap is explained by the challenges women face balancing work and motherhood and it is exacerbated by the lack of paid family leave and high cost of childcare. Of course, none of this implies that women, men, and society don't benefit greatly from children. I'm a mother of four and for a time in my life I was the widowed, single mother of preschool aged children. I have no doubt motherhood reduced my own economic productivity. I'm also sure it's entirely worth it for me, and a decision that I would make again. But that's the point: the tradeoffs and decisions about whether and when to become a parent are inherently personal and closely tied to our economic lives, and even the best laid plans of mice and men, and let's add women, can go awry. Abortion is a common reproductive healthcare need. Before Dobbs, nearly one million pregnancies ended in abortion each year. That's about 20 percent of all estimated pregnancies. At that rate, a quarter of women will obtain an abortion in their lifetime. And when they do, women are often in precarious and vulnerable situations. Most are young mothers, nearly three-quarters are low income, more than half report a recent disruptive life event, like the loss of a job or a housing instability. The most frequent reasons women cite for seeking an abortion relate to their finances, aspirations, and ability to care for other children. This brings me to a key point. Access to contraception and abortion empowers women to plan their economic futures. Expansions in reproductive autonomy have gone hand-in-hand with women's economic progress. The introduction of the birth control pill in 1960, followed by the legalization of abortion in the early 1970s, accompanied a period of epochal, social, and economic change marked by women gaining greater education, strengthening attachments to the labor force, entering new occupations, and increasing their earnings. Now, we all know the maxim that correlation isn't necessarily causation, but in this case, it is. Ample evidence from multiple independent research teams uses statistical tools for causal inference that isolate and measure the effects of reproductive autonomy. The legalization of abortion rewrote women's lives. It reduced teen motherhood by one third and reduced teen marriages by one fifth. It reduced the maternal mortality of Black women by 30 to 50 percent. It allowed women to complete their education and increase their earnings and in doing so it improved the lives of children, reducing the number living in poverty and the numbers experiencing abuse or neglect. As they grew into adulthood, these children themselves had higher rates of college graduation, lower rates of single parenthood, and were less likely to be poor. And it's not as though the salience of abortion access has gone away. For instance, one study finds that as a result of being denied a wanted abortion, women experience a 78 percent increase in past due debt and an 81 percent increase in adverse credit events, like evictions and bankruptcies. Since the Dobbs decision, 14 states are enforcing near total abortion bans, impacting nearly a quarter of American women by increasing their travel distance to the nearest provider. The average affected woman now faces a journey of more than 300 miles one way. If any of my kids needed healthcare 300 miles away, I'd have them there tomorrow, but not everyone is in such a privileged position. I grew up in Burnsville, West Virginia and LaGrange, Georgia, and I know many people for whom coming up with the money, childcare, and multiple days off work on short notice is just not possible. But you don't need to rely on anecdotes. The data tell us that as much as a quarter of people in banned states seeking abortions do not find a way to travel hundreds of miles to obtain one. This is especially true for young women and women of color. And even for those who can make the trip, appointment availability has been severely constrained at many of the facilities on the frontlines to receive them. The first set of post-Dobbs bans is estimated to have resulted in about 30,000 births in 2023 that would not have occurred absent state bans. These children were likely born into some of the poorest and most economically fragile families, many of which contain other children as well. Right now, the Dobbs story is an inequality story, not a macro-level shock story. But depending on future policies, this could change. If abortion access were further restricted, if Congress were to enact a national ban, then we would begin to play the 1970s in reverse, watching a reduction in women's capacity to fully participate in our nation's economy. To conclude, however one feels about the ethics of making contraception and abortion accessible, there's no denying that reproductive policies impact the economic lives of women and their families. Reproductive autonomy is inextricably linked to economic opportunity. Chairman Whitehouse. Thank you very much, Professor Myers. Dr. Zahedi-Spung, please proceed with your testimony. STATEMENT OF DR. LEILAH ZAHEDI-SPUNG, MD FACOG, MATERNAL FETAL MEDICINE, COMPLEX FAMILY PLANNING, PHYSICIANS FOR REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH \4\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \4\ Prepared statement of Dr. Zahedi-Spung appears in the appendix on page 49. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- Dr. Zahedi-Spung. Good morning, Chairman Whitehouse, Ranking Member Grassley, and distinguished members of the Committee. My name is Dr. Leilah Zahedi-Spung, and I use she/ her pronouns. I am a board certified, fellowship trained obstetrician/gynecologist, maternal fetal medicine, and complex family planning physician. I provide high-risk obstetric care, including ultrasounds and genetic testing, perform deliveries, and provide abortion care. I am here today as a Fellow with the Physicians for Reproductive Health. I am also a Fellow with the Society for Maternal Fetal Medicine and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. I'm a brown woman who passes as White, the child of a first-generation immigrant from the Middle East, a mother, and a proud Southerner. I grew up and was trained in the Southeast and I have cared for that community for the majority of my career. I became a doctor because of my commitment to care for people without judgment throughout the course of their lives. Whether I'm caring for someone who's ready to build or create a family, already parenting, grieving due to an unexpected diagnosis, or caring for someone who does not want to be pregnant, all of my patients have something in common. They're making thoughtful decisions about their health and wellbeing and deserve high-quality healthcare, regardless of who they are or where they live. I want to be clear today that abortion is lifesaving, necessary, compassionate, essential healthcare and should be available throughout pregnancy. I've had the honor of caring for a number of families who needed abortion care for a range of reasons, all of them medically necessary. I walked that journey with them, and they were so thankful to be able to access abortion care in their community. Since then, I've heard from a number of those families about subsequent pregnancies that led to healthy babies at the right time in their lives for them. Unfortunately, the Supreme Court's decision in Dobbs, which overturned the constitutional right to abortion wreaked havoc on communities across this country. It wreaked havoc on the lives of people seeking care and the physicians who are doing their best to care for their communities. This is also true for myself and my family. After finishing my Fellowship at Washington University in St. Louis, I was incredibly excited to move back to the South to care for my community. Shortly after moving to Tennessee, I realized I was the only physician who was trained to provide later abortion care. Prior to Dobbs, I was taking care of miscarriages, emergencies, and devastating circumstances for my entire community. Following the Court's decision, Tennessee's abortion ban, one of the most extreme bans in the country, went into effect. This ban did not have any exceptions, not even for life- threatening emergencies and imposed severe criminal penalties. It became very clear quickly that I could no longer provide the care that my patients needed and deserved without facing significant risks to both myself and my family. And one of the hardest decisions I've ever had to make, my family and I decided to move once again to Colorado. The reality is I'm not alone. Many providers have been forced to shift care or services they provide, relocate, or cease offering care altogether. As a physician in Colorado, I am seeing first-hand the consequences of this moment and they are far-reaching. I am able to provide care for people based on what patients and I decide together is the safest and healthiest for their lives without political interference, but so many of the patients who travel to us don't have that option at home. As states continue to ban abortion, patients are having to travel farther and farther distances away from their homes and their communities, not only for their abortion care, but for all types of primary and preventive care. And while I am grateful to be able to care for these people who have made it to us, I can't help but think about all of the people we know who've been forced to remain pregnant and don't have the means and resources to pay for the travel, childcare, additional time off from work, or keep up with the increased costs as they're pushed later into pregnancy. We know from recent data that already thousands of people have been forced to remain pregnant since the Dobbs decision. This is exceptionally dangerous, given the state of maternal mortality and morbidity in this country and especially for our people of color. We already know the consequences when someone is denied an abortion because even before the Supreme Court's decision, it was incredibly difficult for many people to access this care. Studies have shown us that people who are denied an abortion are more likely to fall into poverty, increase their amount of debt, and generally, have worse financial security for years following their abortion denial. Inability to access abortion care has severe consequences, and this is especially true for our Black, Indigenous, and People of Color, who face systemic racism in all aspects of their lives. We cannot forget how collective, economic security benefits all of us and how abortion care restrictions harm our communities as a whole. Despite all of these threats, I am unwavering in my commitment to support people in my home and community in whatever way I can. It shouldn't have to be this way. People should be able to get care in their own communities in a manner that is best for them with the people they trust. I urge you to listen to the stories being told today by the people who provide and access abortion care. I hope these stories help you understand that abortion care is not an isolated political issue and to see how profoundly restrictions on abortion care access harm all of us and the people that we love. Thank you for having me. Chairman Whitehouse. Thank you very much, Doctor. Mrs. Phillips, please proceed. STATEMENT OF ALLIE PHILLIPS, MOM AND ACTIVIST \5\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \5\ Prepared statement of Mrs. Phillips appears in the appendix on page 53. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- Mrs. Phillips. Chairman Whitehouse, Ranking Member Grassley, and members of the Senate Budget Committee, thank you for inviting me here today. My name is Allie Phillips and I live in Clarksville, Tennessee. My husband, Brian, works for a forklift company and I run a small daycare out of our home. Together, we are raising Adalie, my six-year-old daughter. We are not a wealthy family. We work hard to pay our bills on time each month. I spent the first several years of Adalie's life as a single mom, working three jobs while also finishing up my bachelor's degree. Brian, Adalie, and I were so excited to learn that I was pregnant in the fall of 2022 and even more thrilled to find out that we were having a little girl, Miley Rose. Everything was going perfectly until the day of my routine anatomy scan, at 19 weeks, when my doctor told us that they had found multiple concerning fetal issues. Several days later as I waited to meet with the fetal specialist, I had no way of knowing that the next 10 minutes would change my life forever. The fetal specialist came in to go over the results and that list was extensive. Miley's kidneys, bladder, and stomach were not functioning, only two of the four chambers in her heart were not working. There was no amniotic fluid protecting her and she had a rare brain condition. Her growth was a month behind, and she had no lung development. We were told that Miley was not compatible with life. Completely broken, I asked what'd we do now? The doctor suggested I had two options. That I could terminate the pregnancy, but due to Tennessee's ban on abortion, I would have to travel out of state for that healthcare. My second option would be to continue my pregnancy, but risk a miscarriage, a still birth, or giving birth for her to be put right into hospice care. And the doctor warned that the longer I stayed pregnant the worse Miley's condition would get and the more at- risk my health would become. Knowing I had a daughter and a family to live for, we made the difficult decision to seek an abortion. So, instead of grieving this devastating news, my mother and I began researching and calling clinics in states that allowed abortions after 20 weeks. Many did not have open appointments for weeks and the longer I waited the more extensive and expensive the procedure became. Ultimately, I found a clinic in New York City that could get me in the following week. Then I had to book flights, find a hotel, arrange ground transportation, and childcare for Adalie. We had to quickly figure out how to afford all of it. We didn't have thousands of dollars sitting in our bank account. I had to start a Go Fund Me effort online to help cover the unexpected medical and travel costs. Without the help of strangers on the Internet, I would not have had the freedom to leave Tennessee or to make my own medical decisions, rights that my state denied me. Days later, I arrived at a New York City clinic alone, due to security concerns, only patients are allowed in. I was there for several hours when a new ultrasound showed that Miley's heart was no longer beating. Sorry. Chairman Whitehouse. Take your time. Mrs. Phillips. Distraught, I called Brian, my husband, to tell him over the phone that our much-wanted daughter was already gone, and that the abortion scheduled for the following day would be done immediately. I went into surgery alone and I sat in recovery alone. I grieved her loss alone in a city I've never been in, far away from the comfort of my home, my family, and my friends. No one should be treated this way, not in Tennessee and not in the other 13 states that now criminalize abortion, the standard of care that I needed in my situation. Two days later, I flew back home to Tennessee. I had to go back to my life like nothing ever happened. I've never felt as small and inconsequential or unsupported as I did then. I was so depressed that I couldn't go to work for another week after we got back and altogether Brian and I lost three weeks of pay, which is rough for a family that lives paycheck to paycheck. My parents had to help us pay our bills the following month, so we didn't lose our home. We want to have another child, but we're terrified because Tennessee still bans abortion and criminalizes doctors for providing essential healthcare for pregnant patients. Thank you for letting me honor Miley's memory by sharing our story today. Millions of people live under these laws just like Tennessee's and I know that I was lucky to get the care I needed, but no one should have to rely on luck to get essential healthcare. We must have a federal right to access the healthcare we need no matter where we live or how much we earn. Thank you. Chairman Whitehouse. Thank you very much, Mrs. Phillips. Our next witness is Mrs. Ford. STATEMENT OF LESLIE FORD, ADJUNCT FELLOW, CENTER ON OPPORTUNITY AND SOCIAL MOBILITY, AMERICAN ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE \6\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \6\ Prepared statement of Mrs. Ford appears in the appendix on page 56. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- Mrs. Ford. Chairman Whitehouse, Ranking Member Grassley, and Committee members, thank you for the opportunity to testify today. My name is Leslie Ford. I'm an Adjunct Fellow at the Center for Opportunity and Social Mobility of the American Enterprise Institute. My research focuses on helping vulnerable families find pathways out of poverty into opportunity. I'd like to make three points about vulnerable mothers experiencing normally an unplanned pregnancy. First, many women considering abortion face significant challenges, but abortion is not the answer. We have the duty to focus on real solutions. We should hesitate to make policy based on research that says abortion results in better outcomes for women, including the Turnaway Study. It is scientifically difficult to isolate the effects of an abortion on women's long-term outcomes. At best, these studies only point to correlations. We should not draw conclusions from them. Instead, we should focus on the factors that lead women to consider abortion. Nearly 9 in 10 women who chose abortion are unmarried. Over half of women who chose abortion are in their twenties and another 8 percent are in their teens. Many women who seek abortion do so because they fear economic hardship and a majority of post-abortive women say that they chose that option because they experienced pressure to abort from the important people in their lives. We must address the socioeconomic challenges that push them towards abortion. This leads me to my second point. The safety net should be reformed to address many of the challenges that women considering abortion face. The safety net does robustly support vulnerable, low-income mothers, giving them access to food assistance, cash assistance, health insurance, and in many cases housing assistance and childcare. Yet, despite good intentions, the safety net often impedes the path back to self- sufficiency. Most notably, the safety net broadly discourages work, even though employment is the best way for moms to break the cycle of poverty and a key indicator of whether their children will end up in poverty as adults. Major programs also have benefit cutoffs or phase outs that disadvantage married couples. In other words, the safety net traps people in poverty by discouraging both work and marriage. The safety net should be reformed to promote what social scientists call the Success Sequence. This is the completion of at least a high school education, full-time employment, and marriage before welcoming children. But even when an unplanned pregnancy may interrupt the completion of these milestones, there are still immense benefits to completing the steps after giving birth. When following up with mothers 15 years after a non-marital birth, there is nearly a 70-percentage point difference in the likelihood of being in poverty between those who complete the milestones and those who do not. We can and must do more to encourage these mothers to find the pathway back to self- sufficiency. My final point is that the government can't do everything. Mothers need the support of their communities. This means that child support services must do even more to ensure that noncustodial fathers contribute to their child's needs. We should also engage nonprofit community partners that support women through and after unplanned pregnancies. I'd like to highlight here the more than 2700 pregnancy resource centers nationwide that provide wraparound services for mothers in crisis, including essential care from cribs to housing and so much more. I want to conclude by reiterating that unplanned pregnancies present real challenges for mothers, but abortion isn't the answer. We can and must support these women, empowering them to overcome the challenges they face. Reforming the safety net is a crucial step. Like every American, low- income mothers deserve and desire real opportunity for themselves and their children. And it's absolutely essential to support mothers with the power of community. All mothers, particularly single mothers, deserve a consistent and supportive community to walk alongside them, helping them welcome their children into the world and giving those children the brightest future possible. Thank you and I look forward to answering your questions. Chairman Whitehouse. Thank you very much. And next, we have Mrs. Call. STATEMENT OF TAMRA CALL, MSN RN, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, OBRIA MEDICAL CLINIC, AMES, IOWA \7\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \7\ Prepared statement of Mrs. Call appears in the appendix on page 62. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- Mrs. Call. Thank you, Chairman Whitehouse and Ranking Member Grassley and the other members of this Committee, for giving me an opportunity to testify today. My name is Tamra Call and I'm the Executive Director at Obria Medical Clinic of Ames. Our mission is to provide reproductive healthcare and support women in a way which empowers them to make informed, life affirming decisions. Ames is home to Iowa State University and 30,000 university students. I also want to note there are several Obria Medical Clinics around our country. Obria has been certified by the Accreditation Association for Ambulatory Health Care or AAAHC, which accredits outpatient clinics, surgery centers, and college student health centers. Certification from AAAHC reflects a dedication to high quality client healthcare. We operate in compliance with all Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) laws and our clinic is staffed by an OB/GYN, nurse practitioners, radiologists, and highly trained registered nurses. At Obria, we have the privilege of working with smart, strong, and resilient women. Overwhelmingly, the needs women communicate to our staff are not much different than what we all need, healthy relationships with people who will support us without judgment and empower us on the journey to be successful. Obria provides healthcare services at no cost, including pregnancy testing, early ultrasound imaging, monitoring for possible ectopic pregnancy or miscarriage, and providing medical and emotional support, as well as after abortion care. We see hundreds of women at Obria every year. We see women who are in college and afraid they will have to drop out if they chose to carry their pregnancy. Some are professional women who already have children, but weren't planning to have more. Some women are struggling to make ends meet and adding a child feels impossible. Others do not have support from the father of the baby. I'm extremely grateful and humbled to have the opportunity today to share a story that is representative of the hundreds of women we have seen at Obria. Her name has been changed to protect her identity. I'd like to introduce you to Aisa, who moved from Pakistan to the United States, along with her two young children for a job at Iowa State University. She made the move because her husband was not supporting her or her children. Aisa's husband came to the U.S. to visit the children and during this visit Aisa became pregnant. She knew her husband would not provide support and she felt very overwhelmed at the thought of caring for three young children. Aisa felt an abortion was her only option. Aisa scheduled an appointment at our clinic to get more information about the decision she needed to make. The nursing staff performed a pregnancy test and provided her with information about abortion, adoption, and parenting. I have copies of those brochures with me today and am happy to share them with you. The staff listened to her concerns and provided support. Aisa had an ultrasound and when she saw her baby's heartbeat, she knew she wanted to parent. She felt heard, understood, and supported, which empowered her to carry her pregnancy. She is now successfully parenting her three children and has maintained her job at Iowa State University. Obria provides numerous support services and referrals for women. Obria is a Qualified Entity in the State of Iowa to provide Presumptive Eligibility Insurance. This means that prenatal care is covered immediately while the full Medicaid application is being processed. Obria also assists women in applying for Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC), the supplemental nutrition assistance program, the Family Investment Program (FIP) in Iowa, and childcare assistance. The State of Iowa has a live map of childcare providers and openings. Obria also connects women with housing resources. We provide women with referrals to childbirth classes, parenting classes, Early HeadStart and Parents as Teachers. Obria offers a community moms group to foster connection and support among women with young children. We also have referral partners to assist women with food stability, applying for jobs, basic finance classes, transportation needs, and medical care. A woman should never feel that abortion is her only option. When a woman walks into our clinic, she often feels abortion is her only option. The staff at Obria prioritize open communication, allowing the woman to actively participate in her reproductive healthcare decisions. The woman is met with a holistic approach that considers her physical, emotional, social, and financial wellbeing. This approach not only supports the woman in making an informed choice, but also reinforces her autonomy and empowerment in navigating her reproductive journey. The information and relational support a woman receives at Obria instills in her the confidence she needs to be successful. Most of our clients, whether they chose to carry their pregnancy or not, return to Obria for care. What starts as a positive pregnancy test ends in a trusting relationship where we can provide support to women for years. Thank you. Chairman Whitehouse. Thank you. I think it's a bit of a human experience that when extremists want to take away rights and freedoms, they speak in platitudes and generalities and jargon, if you will, so Mrs. Phillips, thank you very much for bringing home the real, immediate, and practical consequences of that on your particular family. Obviously, it was horrible for you. I understand it was a pretty difficult period for Brian and Adalie as well. Mrs. Phillips. Yes. And thank you again for allowing me to share my story. Brian is not Adalie's biological father. He's her stepdad and he was beyond thrilled to have his first biological child. Adalie, who is an autistic, ADHD child full of energy and spunk, has always said when she grows up, she wants to be a big sister. That's what she wants to be and so she was over the moon excited when she found out I was pregnant. She would sing to my belly every night Twinkle Twinkle Little Star and she would make little toys for her sister to have when she was here. Trying to explain death to a then five-year-old is already hard. Trying to explain death of an unborn fetus, unborn baby is even harder. I had to explain to her that Miley was very sick and that she was causing mommy to be very sick and that we had to let Miley go in order for mommy to stay. And as hard as it was, she understood that she needs her mom and that her mom can, potentially, if we decide to try again later on down the road. It was very hard for our family. As a matter of fact, I'm in the year mark of when it happened. March 7th is when I arrived to New York City. February 24th was the day I found out it wasn't compatible, so it's very hard for me to be here today to talk about it, but I know how important it is because my experience isn't exclusive. It's not unique. Millions of women face what I do every day. Chairman Whitehouse. In your testimony, you used a phrase ``standard of care,'' which is a medical phrase and I'd like to turn to Dr. Zahedi-Spung to describe a little bit what standard of care means in the context of Mrs. Phillips' experience and discuss a little bit, if you will, the conflict that this extremism has created between the established medical standard of care for certain situations and laws that have been forced onto these families. Dr. Zahedi-Spung. Thank you so much, Chairman Whitehouse, for that question. So, standard of care is a phrase that's used within medical societies in order to determine what is best to take care of a patient. How we move forward, what the evidence supports, what science supports. In the situation like what Ms. Phillips went through, standard of care is a deeply personal decision for what that family wants. But ultimately, when we have a pregnancy that is not going to result in a live birth, the risks of continuing that pregnancy far outweigh the benefit of continuing it for many families because of the risks of pregnancy itself. Pregnancy is not a benign condition. We already know that we're one of the few industrialized countries that has a worsening and increasing maternal mortality across this country and abortion care is very necessary healthcare in order to provide the standard of care, not to mention the same procedure that is used, the Dilation and Curettage (D&C), for abortion care is also used for miscarriage management. During my time in Tennessee, because of the way that the law was written, ectopic pregnancies, treating ectopic pregnancies, which are pregnancies that are dangerous and life-threatening because they implant outside of the uterus was technically an abortion in the State of Tennessee. So, you have providers who were deferring care that was lifesaving because of their fear of criminalization. When someone's water breaks early, the standard of care is to end that pregnancy because of the risk to that pregnant person and we have evidence across the country, including in places like Texas, that say that if you continue a pregnancy where their water is broken, you increase their likelihood of maternal morbidity and mortality fivefold. Chairman Whitehouse. Senator Grassley. Senator Grassley. I'm going to start with Mrs. Call. Your clinic provides post-abortion care. Could you tell us a little bit about the care for these women and include the types of medical complications and emotional hurdles from an abortion these women can experience. Mrs. Call. Yes. Thank you, Senator Grassley. So, when a woman initially comes to our clinic, one thing that we prepare them for is what the abortion procedure will entail. We give them factual information on that, and we let them know what the signs and symptoms of complications may be so that they know if they need to seek care after an abortion. We have had women come to us that are continuing to have pregnancy symptoms after an abortion and we provide them with an ultrasound to check for any retained products following that abortion. And if there are, they're at risk for infection and we treat them with Cytotec to help through that. We also provide women with emotional support. By far, the complications that we hear most often from our clients are difficulty sleeping, depression, and difficulty in their relationships. We once had a woman call us after an abortion. She was struggling with feeling suicidal. Her family knew that she had had an abortion, and they were supporting her, but she didn't feel like they fully understood and so our nurse was able to connect her with resources to help her. She worked through the emotions that she was experiencing following that abortion. We also have women who come to us after an abortion, or a miscarriage and they say they just felt completely unprepared for the products of conception that would pass in their home while they are alone. When they see limbs and faces and eyes in their bathrooms at home, they are shocked and grieved at the loss of the child that they were carrying. Senator Grassley. Okay. Mrs. Ford, you made a point in your testimony about our safety net system being disjointed and difficult for women and new mothers to navigate. Are there programs and agencies that are more complicated than others and what can agencies currently do to make these programs easier for women to navigate? Mrs. Ford. Thank you, Ranking Member Grassley. Yes, I would say that women normally experience our safety net is deeply fragmented. So, if they're looking for food assistance, they go to one agency. If they're looking for health insurance, they have to go to another agency and usually fill out a different application. If they're looking for help turning away from a situation with domestic violence, that's again a different application and a different caseworker. If they're looking for assistance getting back into the workforce and looking towards Workforce Innovation Opportunity Act funding, it is again, not just a different application, but a different location. I would actually point to the State of Utah as being the most fully integrated state. Their Department of Workforce Services has integrated more than 50 federal programs into the single agency and caseworkers are empowered in the State of Utah to be able to connect the person in front of them to any one of 50 programs that fits their needs and that they are eligible for. Most states are not able to do that. Even in the state I served on, the State of Virginia, the Department of Labor is disconnected from the Department of Social Services, and you must fill out two applications and be treated by two different IT systems in order to access the services to treat the circumstances that normally one family would face. So, looking at integration should be a top priority to be able to assist families that are in need. Senator Grassley. Now, Mrs. Call, I've got a minute plus for you maybe to take any time that you didn't have time in your five minutes to tell us anything else that the Committee ought to know about your work with helping women who are pregnant or want to be pregnant. Mrs. Call. Yes. Thank you. We're talking about economics today and women do often tell us when they come to our clinic that they're considering an abortion because of the financial concerns of adding a child to their family. One of these women was actually a teenage mom who came to our clinic with a three- year-old son. They were living in her car, and she did not want to bring another baby into that situation. And so, she felt, again, that abortion was her only option, but after meeting with our staff and being listened to and heard and understood, the staff was able to give her information about adoption, which she considered but decided not to choose. The staff was able to help her find housing in our community, help her to get onto WIC, to apply for Medicaid, to receive food assistance. And when she had those resources, she felt empowered to carry her child and we have the pleasure of continuing to have a relationship with this woman. And the father of the baby initially was in and out, but he has chosen to be involved and to assist her. And just last week, we were able to help him find a job that has full benefits and will enable him to provide for his family and so we are able to be that safety net for these women and children and men. We never have a woman come to us and say I wish I would've aborted my child. Every woman who comes to our clinic who is financially strapped or in difficult situations they want to keep their children and they just need the resources to be able to do that and the network of people around them who will support them and walk through that with them without any judgment or shame. Thank you. Senator Grassley. Thank you, all of the witnesses. Chairman Whitehouse. I am particularly grateful that Chairman Murray is here because she's at the point of trying to head off a House Republican caused government shutdown, so the fact that she's here is very significant. Chairman Murray. STATEMENT OF SENATOR MURRAY Senator Murray. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I really appreciate your having this hearing today. You know, since Republicans overturned Roe v. Wade reproductive rights have really been under attack like never before in our country and I'm really glad that we are here today to talk about something that doesn't get enough attention, and that is the strong connection between reproductive rights and economic security. Because when Republican politicians take away a woman's control over her own body, they're also taking away women's ability to plan their families, their finances, and their futures on their own terms. The connection is more painfully clear than ever in the post-Dobbs America where your ability to get an abortion depends on where you live and whether you can afford to travel out of state. Can you take the day off, can you afford transportation, do you have a place to stay, do you need childcare? Mrs. Phillips just described all of that that happened to her. And there's a deeply cruel irony faced by women who are unable to get abortions because of costs, women who are forced to stay pregnant by Republican politicians. If someone cannot afford to get the healthcare she needs, what do they think is going to happen when she's forced to have that child? How will she make ends meet? Republicans' antiabortion extremism doesn't just mean forcing women to stay pregnant. Ultimately, it often means women forced out of the workforce and into financial hardship with no support to speak of. Here we are where Republicans want women to stay pregnant, but they don't want to address the childcare crisis. They want to force women to stay pregnant, but today House Republicans want to not fully fund WIC. Republicans want to force women to give birth, but they don't want moms to have paid leave so they can recover from childbirth and spend time with their newborn. So, it's pretty clear that Republicans want to force women to stay pregnant, but won't lift a finger to help new parents. I want you to know that Democrats are working hard to help make sure women are able to decide when and how they start a family, and we actually support those programs that families need. That is a pretty big difference to me, Mr. Chairman. Mrs. Phillips, I want to start with you. Thank you again for sharing your story. I know how challenging that is and I want to make it clear that you are not alone. There are literally hundreds of women out there, probably thousands, who are facing the same choices you do. You're sitting next to a witness who just described a totally different scenario that doesn't even apply to you and wanting a rule of this land that will keep you from getting the healthcare you needed, and that story is not alone. Everyone needs to understand that. Can you talk to this Committee again about the financial barriers that are out there for women who seek abortions, such as you had to do through no want in your life, but because that's what happened to you and what that meant to you and your family when you were forced to go out of state all alone? Mrs. Phillips. Yes. And thank you so much for the question and the opportunity to continue to speak on my story. I will start by addressing the Committee by saying pregnancy isn't a one size fits all situation. Every pregnancy is different, every reason to need an abortion is different. What my fellow witness over here explained did not apply to my situation. This was a planned for and wanted pregnancy and unfortunately for us it wasn't in the cards for us to bring that baby into this world. And as a low-income family, as you spoke, I was a single mom for the first three years of my daughter's life. I took two weeks off of work when she was born, unpaid, and had to go back because I didn't have any other option but to work to take care of my child. I actually started the in-home daycare in my home to be home with Miley because we couldn't afford the infant childcare, which is about another mortgage payment in the State of Tennessee. Without the platform that I had online and without sharing my story, and thank God it went viral when it did, because without the help of complete strangers I would not have made it to New York. I don't know if I would be sitting here today talking to you. Senator Murray. Thank you. I really appreciate that. And Dr. Myers, just in the last few seconds I have, women of color, especially Black women, this is really worsened longstanding inequities that they have faced. Can you talk about how abortion bans and restrictions have created new financial burdens for women, especially women of color? Dr. Myers. Yes. Thank you for that question. Every single study of which I am aware that isolates and measures the effects of abortion restrictions on people's lives finds that women of color experience greater effects of those restrictions, experience restrictions as greater barriers than non-Hispanic, white women. The reasons are complex. Women of color, especially Black women, have higher rates of unintended pregnancy that are driven by lower access to contraception, lower rates of insurance, and being more likely to live in contraceptive deserts. Also, race and poverty interact in complex ways that create greater financial barriers of traveling, taking time off work, accessing childcare for women of color, and so, we often see much greater effects on that population. Senator Murray. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Whitehouse. Senator Kennedy, then Senator Stabenow. STATEMENT OF SENATOR KENNEDY Senator Kennedy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Professor Myers, you are here at the invitation of my Democratic colleagues, is that right? Dr. Myers. That's correct. Senator Kennedy. In his opening statement, my good friend, Senator Whitehouse said, and I want to quote ``Reproductive justice is economic justice.'' Do you agree with that? Dr. Myers. I might as an economist use the word ``rights,'' but yes, I do agree with that. Senator Kennedy. Okay. That's not true for the baby, is it? Dr. Myers. Well, first of all, I would refer to a fetus---- Senator Kennedy. Yes, but that's--well, a fetus. I refer to it as a baby. That's not true for the baby, is it? Dr. Myers. The evidence that I presented to you, Senator Kennedy, was evidence about measurable effects on the lives of women, families, and---- Senator Kennedy. I got that part, but that's not true for the baby, is it? Dr. Myers. I'm sorry. I don't really understand that question. Senator Kennedy. Let me be clearer. I'm sorry. Dr. Myers. As an economist, I measure effects using data. I'm not here to talk about ethics, assignment of personhood. That's not my role. Senator Kennedy. Yes. But you said that you agreed with the Chairman's statement that reproductive justice is economic justice. There is no economic justice for the baby because the baby's dead, right? Dr. Myers. I wouldn't refer--I don't really know how to answer your question. I would refer---- Senator Kennedy. Well, is the baby dead or alive? Dr. Myers. We're referring to a fetus. Senator Kennedy. Okay. Is the fetus dead or alive after an abortion? Dr. Myers. The fetus would be dead after an abortion. Senator Kennedy. Okay. All right. If the mother is healthy and the baby is healthy, do you support abortion up to the moment of birth? Dr. Myers. So, you know, I think that's a really hard question to answer because that just doesn't happen. You're asking me about something that simply doesn't happen. I will tell you---- Senator Kennedy. Well, it's legal in Vermont, New Jersey, Oregon, Colorado, New Mexico, Alaska, and the District of Columbia and the loon wing of the Democratic Party supports abortion up to the moment of birth. So, do you support that or oppose it? Dr. Myers. Let me say I'm here to talk about the economics of abortion. Senator Kennedy. You're here as an expert. What's your belief? Dr. Myers. I think you're asking me as a person, which I'll answer as a person. Senator Kennedy. Okay. You tell me as a person. Dr. Myers. I will tell you, as a person, that I have ambivalence about abortion. I will tell you, as a person, I haven't personally had an abortion and I will also tell you, as a person, looking at the evidence around me and understanding how complex the decisions are that people face, I'm just simply uncomfortable thinking that there's a simple answer that applies to everyone. Senator Kennedy. I don't think you're going to answer my question. Dr. Myers. I trust women and their healthcare providers. Senator Kennedy. It's real simple. You either support abortion or a healthy mother and baby up to the moment of birth or you don't, and I don't think it's a difficult question. How about you, Doctor, do you support if the mother is healthy and the baby is healthy, do you support abortion up to the moment of birth? Dr. Zahedi-Spung. So, Senator, you're using really inflammatory language to talk about a medical procedure and it's not a simple yes or no, not to mention when you make statements like that, you're erasing the grief and the trauma that my patients are going through. Senator Kennedy. You're not going to answer my question either, are you? Dr. Zahedi-Spung. It's not a question that can be answered in an appropriate way, Senator. Senator Kennedy. I think I know your answer. Mrs. Ford, okay, let's take a baby at 21 weeks, this is a baby at 21 weeks, okay. The baby can feel pain, right? Mrs. Ford. Yes. Senator Kennedy. And the baby's pretty developed, right? Mrs. Ford. Yes. Senator Kennedy. And do you know the name of the procedure that the doctor would use to abort that baby at 21 weeks? Mrs. Ford. I'm not a doctor, but I believe it's a D&R. Senator Kennedy. It's called Dilation and Evacuation (D&E), is that right? Mrs. Ford. As far as I understand, yes. Senator Kennedy. Yes. And first, the doctor would dilate the cervix and then the doctor would take what's called a--the doctor would call it a Sopher clamp. It's really a pair of pliers with sharp teeth on the end and without giving the baby any pain medication, the doctor would go through the vagina, through the uterus, and start tearing the baby apart; is that right? Mrs. Ford. As far as I understand the procedure. Senator Kennedy. Yes. And she might start with the legs and pull them out and the arms and pull them out, right? And then she might go for the heart or the spine and just pull the baby out piece by piece, is that right, without giving the baby pain medication. Mrs. Ford. That's what I understand the procedure to be. Senator Kennedy. But then you've got to get the head out. The baby's dead, but maybe not, maybe it's still in pain, but then you've got to get the head out. And even with the cervix dilated, you've got to get the head out, which is hard. So, then the doctor would go in and use those pliers to crush the baby's head; is that right? Mrs. Ford. As far as I know. Senator Kennedy. And then she'd pull the head out, the crushed skull out, right? Mrs. Ford. Mm-hmm. Chairman Whitehouse. Senator Kennedy, your time has expired here. Senator Kennedy. Well, you gave the others plenty of time, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Whitehouse. Just letting you know your time has expired. You have other senators waiting. Senator Kennedy. Well, I was waiting when you were letting others. I'm sorry you don't want to hear about what happens in an actual abortion, but that---- Chairman Whitehouse. I don't think anyone else has gone over. Senator Kennedy . Was what we were here to talk about. Chairman Whitehouse. No one else has gone over. Some of the witnesses went a little bit long, but on both sides. Senator Kennedy. I thought we were here about protecting mothers and killing babies. Chairman Whitehouse. I'm going to turn to Senator Stabenow. Senator Kennedy. Well, I'm sorry you don't want to hear it. Chairman Whitehouse. I'm sorry this had to take place in front of you. My apologies. Senator Kennedy. I know it's ugly, but it's the truth. STATEMENT OF SENATOR STABENOW Senator Stabenow. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mrs. Phillips, I'm so sorry you just had to hear that, particularly as you're talking about the one-year anniversary of what you had to go through. It was shameful and I'm very, very sorry. No one here should be judging you or any other woman who has to make decisions based on their life and what's happening in their pregnancy and so thank you so much for being here. This is about the freedom to make decisions, healthcare decisions for women, half the population, freedom to make our own healthcare decision. In Michigan, after Roe v. Wade was overturned, women--people across Michigan put this on the ballot for our Commission and Constitution in 2022. Overwhelming, Democrats, Republicans, people of all ages voted to put that in Michigan's constitution, the freedom to make our own reproductive healthcare decisions, which is great. Except now we are here with a national abortion ban being talked about by our Republican colleagues and if we have a Republican President, a national abortion ban takes that all away. And we also know that In Vitro Fertilization (IVF) now, which is the choice to have a baby and go through IVF, that also potentially is going to be taken away and probably birth control is next. So, this is about basic freedom and so I just want to start, though, a little differently than I had planned. But Mrs. Call, you talked about no one should feel abortion is their only option. I couldn't agree more. I work on nutrition issues and healthcare issues. I've been at the forefront of all of these issues. I could not agree more, but listening to Mrs. Phillips' story today, do you think she had another option? Mrs. Call. Yes. Thank you for the question, Senator Stabenow. So, I am not a medical doctor, but I do know our OB/ GYN has worked for over 30 years and has delivered over 4,000 babies and I know he has cared for multiple women who were in a similar situation to Mrs. Phillips, and I know that he worked closely with them---- Senator Stabenow. I am, just in the interest of time, I don't want to interrupt you, but you're saying--her baby was dead, but she had another option. Mrs. Call. Well, when her baby is dead, it's no longer an abortion. At that point, it's a dilation and curettage (D&C), I believe, medically. Senator Stabenow. Okay. All right. Thank you. I appreciate your work, but again, there's a lot of different stories to tell here. Also, I wanted to ask Mrs. Ford--you talked about the safety net. I couldn't agree more on that. Right now, we have a situation where we're working to fully fund WIC for pregnant moms and babies, healthy food, nutrition, and so on. Do you support WIC as a--funding WIC? Mrs. Ford. WIC is an important resource for mothers, especially providing formula to their children. Senator Stabenow. Yes. So, we shouldn't have waiting lists, which is going to happen if we don't fully fund WIC. It seems to me if there's a nine-month pregnancy, you can't have a waiting list, right? And so, Mrs. Call, you mentioned WIC as being a support and that's something that you would support? Mrs. Call. Yes. Senator Stabenow. Also, I've been trying for years-- actually, Senator Grassley and I, for years, to put in place quality standards for labor and delivery under Medicaid. Half our babies are born with Medicaid healthcare and Republican colleagues have stopped that here in the Senate for years. We don't have national quality standards. I assume, as part of the safety net, Mrs. Ford, you would support having quality standards for labor and delivery. Mrs. Ford. Yes, across labor and delivery and especially post-abortive care. Fewer than 20 states actually track post- abortive outcomes and most abortion clinics actually--women who are experiencing trouble are normally referred to a hospital Emergency Room (ER). Senator Stabenow. Right. Well, I'm talking of just healthy babies. We should have that. Mrs. Call. Yes, across the board for any (unintelligible). Senator Stabenow. And colleagues should be working together to do that. Mrs. Call. Yes. Senator Stabenow. Yes, we should also. And I assume, Mrs. Call, you would support having quality standards as well. Mrs. Call. Yes, I agree. Senator Stabenow. Which is not happening because of folks here in this body. So, Mrs. Phillips, let me go back to you. Thank you, again. How has this horrible experience that you had to go through changed the way you think about your family's future and the kind of world you want your daughter to grow up in? Mrs. Phillips. Thank you for that question, Senator. It has been extremely difficult. As I stated before, this was a planned and wanted pregnancy. We still want to expand our family. That's something we plan to do, but unfortunately, while the ban still sits in Tennessee, we're terrified. It was a very traumatic experience that I had to go through, that my family had to go through. My card here says, ``Mom and Activist.'' Since what happened to me happened, I have turned to activism because my daughter is growing up in a state without bodily autonomy. My daughter is growing up in a state that lawmakers are telling her that she doesn't have a choice. It's one thing to put me through it. I'm a 29-year-old woman, but to put a child through something like that is inexcusable. And I would say that I'm hopeful that we can come to an agreement, a nonpartisan agreement in our state capitol and restore abortion access so I can continue my plans of my future in expanding my family because that's something I desperately want to do, but I'm terrified to do. Senator Stabenow. Thank you. American women deserve the freedom to make our own decisions. And Mr. Chairman, this side of the dais trusts women. Chairman Whitehouse. Senator Lee. Senator Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman---- Chairman Whitehouse. Sorry to interrupt. Followed by Senator Merkley. Senator Lee. At the outset, I feel the need to point out something that I think a casual observer might miss from some of the comments. The Dobbs decision did not criminalize abortion. The Dobbs decision didn't do anything to affect the legal status of abortion, other than to return the decision, the primary decision on abortion, back to the states. They concluded that this has always been an issue that was before the states prior to Roe v. Wade and its progeny. The Supreme Court in Dobbs simply undid Roe and said this is a decision that most of the time, that is, you know, unless we're dealing with something the District of Columbia, the military installations using government funds or something like that, isn't normally going to be federal action and so they returned it back to where it was. Now, states have been more or less out of this arena for about 50 years. They had been out of the arena for about 50 years as most abortions occurring in America couldn't be meaningfully restricted in light of Roe v. Wade and its progeny. States are getting back to that business now after it had been usurped by a judicial oligarchy of sorts for nearly half a century. And so, yes, states will handle this differently, but states handle many things differently. Everything from occupational licensing to what procedures might be performed in certain states, even the criminal laws of one state differ from those of another. Those laws are made by men and women elected by the citizens of those states. Sometimes those laws can end up having unforeseen consequences. Sometimes tragic ones. Those laws could be changed from time to time, but it's important to focus on what this is about and what it is not. It is, at the end of the day, something that is in the hands of the American people. This is part of what having a democratically elected government means. It's what it focuses on. I've heard several mentions made to the idea that there're suddenly going to be a national abortion ban, a federal abortion ban enacted. To my knowledge, Republicans who now control the House haven't even pushed for a vote on that elsewhere. The same can't be true of the Born Alive Protection Act. It's a different circumstance. Where as a child is born alive, I would hope we could all agree regardless of what your religious, moral, or policy feelings about abortion are, I would hope we could all agree that once a child is born there are all kinds of protections and that allowing someone to be killed can result in all kinds of ramifications. Mrs. Ford, I'd like to start with you. I'd like you to talk to us a little bit about the marriage penalties that exist in our current tax code and our social safety net at the federal level and what harmful effects they might have on things like family formation? How do they harm, for example, married couples with children in a way that doesn't affect other families? Mrs. Ford. Yes. I'd like to start by pointing out that marriage penalties in the safety net, which exists primarily in a program explicitly like the Earned Income Tax Credit you can earn thousands more if you are unmarried and have children versus if you are married and have children. But there are also implicitly throughout the rest of our programs. For instance, if you don't declare the partner who you are not married to within the home, you can receive thousands more Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) benefits or Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) benefits or any other number of benefits. And the effect that we see that this has had in our culture is within the unmarried birth rate. We have the highest number--percentage of children living in single-parent homes in the world. It is about a quarter of U.S. children live in single-parent homes as compared to 7 percent around the world. Senator Lee. Are you suggesting that we have, thus, incentivized out of wedlock birth and childrearing? Mrs. Ford. The information seems to be falling that way because when we track Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) data, if you're looking at college educated women, 10 or 11 percent have children out of wedlock. That's roughly similar to what was happening in the 1960s. When you were looking at less educated women, it comes close to 60 percent. It really does hit on education levels and income levels whether a child is going to be born out of wedlock. And we know very clearly from the data that there is an impact to having two parents in the home. This is why Melissa Kierney's recent book The Two Parent Privilege was published. She is not right-leaning. This is following the data. There is a huge benefit to having two parents in the home with the child. Senator Lee. How does that contribute to the perpetuation or even exacerbation of existing inequities along racial, economic, and other demographic lines? Mrs. Ford. We know that if there is a single mom or a single parent who is raising her child alone, she is much more likely to experience economic hardship and it is much more likely for her children to experience intergenerational poverty. The 60 years that Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) was run in this country showed that economic outcome. This program which provided cash assistance to single mothers by the mid-1990s, nine in ten women were unemployed, one in seven children were on the program. And after it was reformed to focus on work the out-of-wedlock birth rate stabilized. Women returned to work by nearly 20 points and child poverty in this country dropped by 60 percent. Senator Lee. Human beings are rational actors and when we incentivize the wrong things sometimes, we'll get those things and those things can sometimes harm a lot of people, especially the most vulnerable. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Whitehouse. Thank you, Senator Lee. The order I have set this stage, depending on attendance, is Senator Merkley, Senator Braun, Senator Padilla, Senator Kaine, Senator Wyden. That's the sequence, but if people aren't here, you can be bumped up the sequence. Senator Merkley. STATEMENT OF SENATOR MERKLEY Senator Merkley. Thank you. Dr. Zahedi-Spung, if in some states--I want to understand if an ultrasound reveals that the fetus does not have a heartbeat in some states would it be basically the law now requires that woman to carry that child until there is a miscarriage--that child who does not have a heartbeat? Dr. Zahedi-Spung. I don't know of any states that require people to carry pregnancies that are true miscarriages. What I can say, though, is that with procedure bans around D&Cs and D&Es, it can require a patient to have experienced a miscarriage where the fetus's heart stops beating to deliver that fetus and undergo an induction instead of having a medical procedure that could end their suffering quickly. Senator Merkley. That was exactly the situation we were in with our first child. We lost our first child at four months. And I think it would've been extremely difficult for Mary to be required by the state to carry that child post that point. Dr. Zahedi-Spung. I'm sorry. Senator Merkley. I want to turn, Professor Myers, to the poison pill riders that the House has proposed, including riders that restrict access to medical or medication abortion. What would be the economic impact of passing an appropriations bill with some of these extreme anti-abortion riders? Dr. Myers. Thank you for that question. The economic impacts could be tremendous, depending on the rider. But I'd really like to talk about medication abortion for just a second because mifepristone has become incredibly important to the provision of abortion in this country. Even before Dobbs, more than half of all abortions were provided as medication abortions. And right now, about 40 percent of the brick-and- mortar abortion facilities in this country only provide medication abortion. The remaining facilities, with very few exceptions, provide both medication and procedural abortions. If mifepristone access were meaningfully reduced, it would upend the provision of abortion in this country. It could end telehealth provision, which has become extraordinarily important to people. It could shutter providers, brick-and- mortar providers across the country, including in states that have been supportive of abortion rights and might not understand the threat that faces them, and it would create really limited appointment availability at many of the facilities that remain. Senator Merkley. Thank you very much. And Dr. Zahedi-Spung, I want to turn back to you. Based on your experience now in Colorado, let's say with the expanded access to abortion after the Dobbs decision, have you seen an increase in the number of folks coming into Colorado from out-of-state? Dr. Zahedi-Spung. Thank you for that question, first off, but we've certainly seen an increase in the number of abortion care procedures that we're providing. Our group has seen an eight times increase in care provision in the last year and a half since the Dobbs decision in addition to about a 40 percent increase in procedural abortion and care that's been seen. It's hard to quantify how much of that is from out of state versus just more patients needing the care and not being able to access it. Senator Merkley. Has that created delays in the state for a woman's access to reproductive care? Dr. Zahedi-Spung. Yes, certainly. I mean there's only a certain number of us who can provide this care, given you have to have specialty training in order to do it. And none of us ever want to delay a patient receiving necessary medical care, but there's only so many hours in the day where we can actually provide that care. Senator Merkley. Oregon has certainly seen that. It's reported that as much as a thousand percent increase in patients crossing the state line from Idaho. Mrs. Phillips, thank you for sharing your story, a story I could connect with, with my own family's experience, although not all of the pieces of it that were so powerful. Because of the restrictive laws in Tennessee, is it the case that your doctor was not even able to offer advice to you on how to obtain an abortion? Mrs. Phillips, Thank you for that question, Senator. My doctor had taken an oath to provide the utmost care for her patients and at that point in time the way she understood Tennessee's law was that she could not offer me resources. She stated that I would have to do the research on my own and that I was left to essentially defend myself, my own life and fertility. Senator Merkley. Yeah. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all. Chairman Whitehouse. Senator Braun, followed by Senator Padilla. STATEMENT OF SENATOR BRAUN Senator Braun. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This question will be for Mrs. Call. I'm going to kind of preface it with these comments. Colleagues before me have had questions about the nature of life and human essence and I think it made the point that it's hard to distill that into economic terms. When you try to do it, especially through an institution that has now become one that has no problem with borrowing and spending money from future generations just to tell where we're at there. This is the Budget Committee. We are now borrowing a trillion dollars every six months. And you know who's back that's going to be upon, our kids and our grandkids. That's probably a more pertinent subject to what we're talking about here today, but on the subject matter we've got here, that has no good ending to it. That is about as bad a business plan as anyone would ever want to be a part of. But here to try to speak about this in economic terms, I think from the state I'm from, this is a question of being pro-family, pro-mother, and that would be a place, I think, that would be a legitimate place to have a discussion just not trying to even do anything about it. If you're for it, when you're borrowing it from your kids and grandkids. Indiana has effective public and private healthcare networks that help women without urging them to destroy an innocent life. The General Assembly's fulfillment of Indiana's culture of life includes the decision to disburse TANF funds to pregnancy care centers in an alternative to abortion programs. Mothers should not feel alienated from assistance and forced into abortions. Sadly, the Biden Administration embraces a culture that wants to do the opposite, to strip support for pregnant women and their unborn babies. I just think it's the wrong place to go. My question is what'd you tell young families and worried mothers when they need help with an unexpected pregnancy? Should they be leaning towards that, taking the tools away from states that want to maybe talk about life and preserving it? What's your opinion on that? Mrs. Call. Yes. So, your question is what we tell families about that? Can you repeat exactly what question you want me to answer? Senator Braun. So, when you have families confronting these issues, what is your advice as opposed to what the Biden Administration, I think, has been pushing. They can take funds, borrowed money, to facilitate ending life. I mean what should be the message? Mrs. Call. So, I mean, what I believe the message should be is that there are people here who are very ready and willing to support you and the state is ready and willing to support you, our local community is ready and willing to support you. I'm very thankful that the State of Iowa recently passed the More Options for Maternal Support (MOMS) Program, which provides state funding to centers like ours so that we can truly support these women where they are. And I want to be very clear. We never suggest to a woman what she should or should not do. We just simply give her the information, let her know all of the resources that are available to her because, as it's been said, it can be tricky to navigate all of these systems and institutions and so we're just there to be an advocate for her and to help her walk through that as she considers her decision. Senator Braun. And have you had any outreach from the Biden Administration to help you in your programs? Mrs. Call. No. Senator Braun. Zero. Mrs. Call. Zero. Senator Braun. And I think that's just something if you're going to try to push one dynamic, at least to be fair, it ought to be something that you're willing to do with the other point of view as well. Thank you. Mrs. Call. Thank you. Chairman Whitehouse. Senator Padilla. Senator Padilla. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Chairman Whitehouse. Then Senator Kaine. STATEMENT OF SENATOR PADILLA Senator Padilla. I just wanted to lead with a couple of datapoints and I first just thank you all for your testimony and participation today. It's an important and timely conversation, obviously. About 42 percent of adults, up from 33 percent just about five years ago, say that they have either used fertility treatments or personally know someone who has. And there are currently an estimated 1.5 million frozen embryos nationwide. The recent ruling in Alabama effectively bans IVF in certain states because it would subject people involved in all steps of the process to unreasonable, criminal liability. As Republicans continue to stumble over the flawed arguments against reproductive rights, what I see happening is they're realizing that it's one thing to say that you're opposed to abortion, in theory, and it's a whole other thing to try to legislate in this new reality. Now, it's offensively hypocritical for so many House GOP members, for example, lining up to pledge support for IVF while simultaneously signing onto so-called Parenthood legislation with no carveout for embryos and clinics. My first question, Dr. Zahedi, how would you square Republican support for IVF with support for Personhood legislation like the Life at Conception Act? Dr. Zahedi-Spung. So, thank you for that question, Senator. And if I'm understanding your question, I think the hardest part about all of this discussion is that reproductive justice is both about choosing when to have a family and choosing when not to, and then the safety around how you choose to parent your children as well. And the argument around IVF, I mean, they are in conjunction with the argument about why abortion care is necessary medical healthcare is that you're taking away the autonomy of families to make the decisions that are best for them and you're erasing grief and trauma for those families that are having to make decisions that are very difficult. Having known plenty of colleagues as well as friends who've had to go infertility treatment that is a very difficult road for them and then to have their time and energy and responsibility taken from them by the state and told what they can and can't do with that is just as scary as what we're seeing with the patients who are coming to us for abortion care. Senator Padilla. I appreciate the perspective as a physician in this because for a party that claims to be about rights and freedoms and liberties, they're taking away rights and freedoms and liberties from families across the country. Dr. Myers, can you talk a little bit more about the societal and economic impacts of banning IVF? Dr. Myers. Yes. And I'll preface it by saying, since this has been a bit of a mixture of the personal and professional, my oldest child is an IVF baby and the product of a frozen embryo transfer. This really hits close to home for me, seeing what's happening in Alabama. So, reproductive autonomy isn't just about young people avoiding parenthood until they're ready. It's about all people being able to become parents when they want to and IVF has helped millions of people, including me. The economic evidence suggests that it allows women to spend more time seeking the right partner, investing in education, and investing in their careers. And in a country and moment when we're increasingly seeing people delaying parenthood, a lack of access to IVF is very concerning from an economist perspective. Senator Padilla. Thank you very much. And if I can, in my brief time remaining, I do want to touch on another topic because I think as Dr. Zahedi exemplifies, there are across the country obstetricians, gynecologists, and nurses that are leaving their practices in states like Idaho, Texas, Oklahoma, and Tennessee while new doctors are avoiding those states altogether. Facing the departure of respected and talented physicians many hospitals have since closed their labor and delivery units in these Red states. So, the brain drain extends beyond just maternity care. Following the Dobbs decision, a growing number of companies have updated their health insurance policies to include abortion travel benefits and it's because they recognize the impact that state laws restricting abortion care have on their ability to attract and retain talent. Dr. Zahedi, you left Georgia and Tennessee, as you shared in your testimony as a result of Dobbs and the states' abortion restrictions, I can imagine Republican attacks on reproductive healthcare is driving obstetricians and other healthcare professionals from Red states. How does this impact access to essential healthcare services, including prenatal visits, including access to contraception, including maternal/fetal medicine and postpartum care, cesarean sections more in those states that are being left behind? Dr. Zahedi-Spung. Thank you so much for that question, Senator. I have a deep concern for what's going to happen in this country as these rights continue being taken away. We know even prior to Dobbs that states that had abortion care restrictions had worsening maternal mortality and morbidity and that was still divided and worsened across racial lines as well. So, now that we're adding in the factor that physicians are afraid to be in states where there are significant abortion bans, they're eliminating an entire workforce. And in addition, almost 50 percent of the OB/GYN residents in this country are training in states with abortion care restrictions. We will graduate an entire generation of OB/GYNs who don't know how to do D&C for miscarriage management, who aren't equipped to counsel patients appropriately about the findings of their pregnancies, who aren't going to be able to provide necessary, emergency medical care in these communities. And I'm very afraid what that's going to mean for their patients. Idaho, for example, has had multiple maternity wards closed over the last several years, as almost 25 percent of their OB/ GYN workforce has left and there is maybe two maternal/fetal medicine physicians left in the entire state. Patients are traveling 200 miles one way for prenatal care now in a state that already had really terrible maternal mortality and morbidity. I worry what that means for the residents of that state and how we're going to continue to watch women die. Chairman Whitehouse. Senator Kaine and then Senator---- Senator Padilla. Mr. Chair, just in closing, because obviously we have and will continue to have fiery debates as policymakers and we're seeing what impact it's had on medical professionals in states across the country, but the ultimate consequence--and this is why you're having this hearing, the ultimate consequence is on women and families and that needs to be at the center of our actions here. Thank you. Chairman Whitehouse. Senator Kaine and then Senator Van Hollen, unless Senator Wyden returns. Senator Kaine. STATEMENT OF SENATOR KAINE Senator Kaine. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mrs. Phillips, your testimony was incredibly powerful, and I really want to thank you for sharing it. And the legal system in Tennessee and this country has really failed you. I was listening to Mrs. Call earlier saying that in her work she tries to inform people and tries to be non-judgmental and let them do what they chose to do. Your state does not let you do that. Your state does not let physicians do it. The fact that you have a physician who's taken an oath to provide you patient care is so afraid of criminal liability or loss of licensing privileges that when you're given this devastating news you and your mom have to go online and search to find a place thousands of miles from where you live, far away from any family in a city that you've never visited, if I remember your testimony right, to terminate a failing failed pregnancy. I mean the cruelty is astounding, astounding. I mean I just would like to go back and just clip that piece of the testimony from Mrs. Call earlier, we want to accompany women and let them decide what's in their best interest. If that's what a healthcare provider testifies, why wouldn't a state legislature or a court system or Congress have that same attitude? I want to push back a little bit on Senator Braun's notion. He was pushing a line that the Biden Administration is interested in abortion and not on moms, and so let me correct that. The American Rescue Plan was the first piece of legislation that was passed under the Biden Administration of the 117th Congress and my colleagues were here, and it passed by one vote, one vote. Every Democrat voted for it. Every Republican voted against it. The American Rescue Plan included a really important provision for moms and kids. Prior to it, Medicaid would cover a mom after delivery for 90 days. More than half the births in this country are Medicaid births. Prior to the American Rescue Plans, moms would be covered for 90 days. In the American Rescue Plan, we allowed states to expand that 90 days to a year, where the mom gets covered for a year because there are so many challenges that mothers face post-delivery. That passed by one vote. Democrats did that. Joe Biden and Kamala Harris did that. Every Republican voted against mothers. They voted against mothers. And guess what states have done with that mandate? We extended it in an appropriations bill the next year. Forty-five states have decided to embrace this optional mandate that we allowed them to do, embracing the Biden/Harris policy, embracing a policy the Democrats supported and every last Republican in the Senate opposed. Mr. Chair, you've been here longer than me. There are days when you're here and you wonder if you do anything. Then there are days you're here when something happens by one vote, the American Rescue Plan, moms get Medicaid coverage. We saved two million workers' pensions. Saving the Affordable Care Act in August of 2017. It happened by one vote. The Inflation Reduction Act to bring down prescription drugs happened by one vote. The American Rescue Plan had another pro-mom, pro-family, pro-kid provision, the Child Tax Credit that reduced infant poverty by 45 percent within six months passed by one vote. Every Democrat supported it. Every Republican opposed it. I gather from your testimony, Professor Myers, that one of the reasons that women often cite for terminating pregnancy is financial pressure. The financial pressure of healthcare expenses, the financial pressures of raising kids and finding childcare. Knowing that you're going to be covered for healthcare in the year after delivery, knowing that you can get a child tax credit to help with the expenses these are the kinds of policy that are pro-mom and pro-family and might even help the U.S. deal with the declining birth rate and turn it around and we could start to have a growing birth rate again if families felt that they had a financial cushion and the financial pressure wasn't causing them to consider terminating a pregnancy. Am I right about that? Dr. Myers. Yes, I think you are, Senator. Thank you for the question. American birth rates have been plummeting and the reasons are very complex, but I think we should all be very concerned about that through multiple lenses, including a fiscal lens. And one of the reasons that people give for delaying becoming parents or having fewer children is financial concern. And so, I agree with Mrs. Ford that we could bolster the social safety net. We could reduce marriage penalties, I think that's a really good idea, but you just can't leave out the other financial concerns that affect families. And the Child Tax Credit was an incredibly important piece of that social safety net, expanding Medicaid is an incredibly important piece, making welfare benefits more accessible, doing things like reducing child caps. There are so many other things we need to do to bolster the social safety net and in doing so we would likely help work against this concerning trend of declining births. Senator Kaine. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Whitehouse. Senator Van Hollen. STATEMENT OF SENATOR VAN HOLLEN Senator Van Hollen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank all of you for your testimony here today. And Mrs. Phillips, I wasn't in the room, but I saw your testimony on C-SPAN as the hearing progressed and I want to thank you for being here and sharing your very personal story and it does Miley Rose's memory great credit that you're here speaking on behalf, not just for yourself, but as you said, millions of other American women. So, now you've experienced a Senate hearing. Lots of things have been said and so I just want to give you the opportunity, as we close, I may be the last senator to ask questions. After you've heard everything here today, is there anything that you would like to say in response and make sure that we can correct any misperceptions that some people have expressed. Mrs. Phillips. Yes. And thank you so much, Senator, for giving me this opportunity. I will start by saying that I made a promise to Miley that her name would not die with her, so that is why my activism is so important to me is, so people know who she is. I want to make two statements before I go into my final thing that I would like the Committee to know. I think it was Senator Kennedy came to this hearing knowing that there was going to be a mother here who had to make the difficult decision to terminate a 20-week pregnancy and he decided it was in his best interest to show a 21-week fetus and his testimony was nothing but fearmongering. From my experience, that was not my experience what he was trying to persuade. Also, Mrs. Call, to answer your question to what he had asked, my procedure was an abortion. It is on my medical paperwork that I had an abortion, even though my daughter was deceased. It is not back and forth. An abortion is a medical procedure, whether that fetus is deceased or not. But I would like to ask the Committee to remember my story and to remember that I'm one of thousands, if not millions of people in this country that need or needed abortion access and to remember that it's not black and white and one size does not fit all. We can't be putting politics into healthcare decisions and also to remember these facts. That abortion access is essential healthcare, no matter how you want to look at it. It's essential healthcare for so many and exceptions don't work. I'm a living testimony to that. Tennessee had a very vague exception to protect the life of the mother. My life was at risk, and I did not qualify. I would ask the Committee to consider passing a law that allows access without exception, just all across the board because when someone needs healthcare, they should be able to receive that healthcare when they need it and not have to navigate the hurdles like I did. Because like I said, I don't know if I hadn't made it to New York if I would be here with you today. So, I'm very thankful for the opportunity that I was given to get to New York and now this opportunity to fight back against the extreme bans that we're facing in many states. Senator Van Hollen. Thank you, Mrs. Phillips. Thank you for your earlier testimony and that powerful closing. And Dr. Zahedi-Spung, if I could just ask you to elaborate a little bit more on the real challenges doctors face in trying to navigate these legal areas. Senator Padilla asked some of the questions I'd planned to ask about the impact on doctors and their decisions to have to move to other states and how that leaves women in the workforce in states like Tennessee at greater risks, but it's because doctors don't want to end up being fined or worse for their actions. And I know from your testimony that you call upon your fellow physicians when you were in Tennessee, and others to do, to try to navigate these things and how it's an impossible standard. Can you just talk about that, that kind of experience of having to go through these difficult decisions when people are talking about imposing legal penalties? Dr. Zahedi-Spung. Thank you so much for that question, Senator. I'm a physician and not a lawyer. I did 11 years of training in order to become a doctor and trust my own clinical gestalt and then a law went into effect that took my ability to care for my patients in the way that was necessary away from me and from so many others. I'll never forget after the days after Dobbs the number of conversations I had with our hospital lawyers, my criminal defense attorney, the lawyers across the country who were trying to navigate the everchanging experience for patients and providers, and I wasn't able to care for patients because I was trying to figure out if I could even take care of them. I had a hematologist call me and ask if he could give chemotherapy to a breast cancer patient who he'd just found out was pregnant because he was worried that if he did and she miscarried he'd go to jail for taking care of his patient. It was--it is still terrifying. We navigate this on a regular basis with patients who are coming to us with very complex care, trying to make sure that they have all of the follow-up and the care that they need back home while still protecting their privacy. It's untenable and I am devastated I had to leave a place that I loved and a community that I cared deeply for, but I knew I couldn't do any good if I wasn't able to practice medicine anymore. Senator Van Hollen. Thank you, Doctor. Thank you. Dr. Zahedi-Spung. Thank you. Senator Van Hollen. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Chairman Whitehouse. Thank you very much. We thank all of the witnesses. There was a comment, a critique, Professor Myers, of your conclusions regarding the causal effect between reproductive care restrictions and the economy, and specifically the appropriate conclusions to be drawn from the Turnaway Study. You've not had a chance to respond to that. I think, in fairness, I should give you a chance to respond to that if you would care to. Dr. Myers. I would. Thank you, Chairman Whitehouse. I'd like to return to that. So, I want to say, first of all, very clearly that most of the evidence that I present and share in my testimony is not from the Turnaway Study. There's ample evidence from multiple independent research teams using different natural experiments to isolate and measure the effects of abortion and access. So, we're not just talking about the Turnaway Study, by any means. But when we are talking about the Turnaway Study, that evidence is causal. To illustrate one of the most important studies to come out of that research project--and I want to be clear, it's not mine, this is another team--took people who were in the Turnaway Study, they were seeking abortions, arriving at providers, and some of them were finding out that they were just past the gestational age limit to receive the abortion that they wanted and they were turned away. And others were just under it and received that abortion. Chairman Whitehouse. Hence, the name of the study. Dr. Myers. Hence, the name of the study. And the researchers connected all of these people to their Experian credit reports and they followed what their credit reports looked like for months, years before this pivotal event in their lives and the two groups trended incredibly similarly. They looked really, really similar right up until the moment that this happens to them and that's when there's this incredible divergence and all of a sudden the people who are turned away have this enormous increase in adverse credit events. I don't think a reasonable person can look at that evidence and say that's just a correlation. Something else happened that day that caused their credit to fall off a cliff. Chairman Whitehouse. All right. Well, thank you for that response. Thank you all for your testimony here today. I know that, Mrs. Phillips, this was particularly difficult for you and one of our colleagues made it even more difficult and I apologize for that, but I thank you very much for being here. The record will remain open in case anybody wishes to add anything for another week. With that, this hearing is concluded.  