HOW PRIMARY CARE IMPROVES HEALTH CARE EFFICIENCY ---------- WEDNESDAY, MARCH 6, 2024 Committee on the Budget, U.S. Senate, Washington, DC. The hearing was convened, pursuant to notice, at 10:07 a.m., in the Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Sheldon Whitehouse, Chairman of the Committee, presiding. Present: Senators Whitehouse, Murray, Wyden, Kaine, Van Hollen, Lujan, Padilla, Grassley, Johnson, Marshall, Braun, and R. Scott. Also present: Democratic staff: Dan Dudis, Majority Staff Director; Anirudh Srirangam, Healthcare Policy Advisor. Republican staff: Chris Conlin, Deputy Staff Director; Krisann Pearce, General Counsel; Nic Pottebaum, Professional Staff Member; Ryan Flynn, Staff Assistant. Witnesses: Mr. Christopher Koller, President, Milbank Memorial Fund Dr. Amol Navathe, Associate Professor, Perelman School of Medicine, and The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania Dr. Bob Rauner, President, Partnership for Healthy Nebraska, and Representative, American Academy of Family Physicians Ms. Lisa M. Grabert, Visiting Research Professor, Marquette University College of Nursing Dr. Christina Taylor, Chief Medical Officer, Value Based Care, Clover Health, and President-Elect, Iowa Medical Society OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN WHITEHOUSE \1\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \1\ Prepared statement of Chairman Whitehouse appears in the appendix on page 31. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- Chairman Whitehouse. All right, let me call our Committee back to order for purposes of the hearing, which I hope will open some healthy bipartisan conversations on ways that we can save money in our healthcare system by improving the quality of care for patients. Members of the Committee may recognize this chart, certainly members of the Finance Committee may recognize this chart, which I've used for years to show the enormous opportunity that we have in healthcare in America. It graphs healthcare spending as a percentage of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) against life expectancy. And as you can see, we are outliers in exactly the wrong direction. That's the bad news. The good news is there's lots of room for improvement and the numbers are big. U.S. health spending makes up 17 percent of GDP. As you can see, it's a far higher percentage than in peer nations. Yet, U.S. life expectancy is below peer nations and even falling. Indeed, it's now fallen to its lowest in two decades. By contrast, Germany's health spending represents 12.5 percent of that nation's GDP with longer life expectancy. If America's healthcare spending went from 17 percent to 12.5 percent of GDP, it would save our budget nearly a trillion dollars a year, $10 trillion dollars in our customary 10-year budget window. So, we are dealing with potentially very, very big savings. Why is American healthcare spending so inefficient? One answer is how badly we fund primary care. In our Budget Committee hearing last October, we heard that despite overwhelming evidence that primary care is associated with longer life expectancy and lower downstream health costs, the U.S. continues to spend less on primary care as a share of total healthcare spending than any other peer Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) country. In fact, average primary care spending across our peer nations is nearly double ours. U.S. percentage spending on primary care actually declined from a sad 6.5 percent in 2002 to a truly woeful 4.7 percent in 2019. Today, three in ten Americans report not having a usual source of primary care. In some areas, often rural areas, the situation is much worse. At our October hearing, we also heard how accountable care organizations (ACOs), and other payment models have improved the quality of care while lowering the cost of care. We've seen that in Rhode Island through two primary care ACOs, Coastal Medical and Integra. So, today's hearing is about how to do more of that. How to deliver better care at a lower cost with better outcomes for patients. This is often pretty straightforward stuff. Primary care doctors and nurses know their patients. They know what they need to stay healthy, whether it's home visits or telehealth options or better coordination of their medications or better diets or moving that slippery rug at the bottom of the stairs. Letting primary care doctors and nurses out of the handcuffs of fee for service payment frees up these simple innovations and patients love it. We'll hear from experts today how to get there, not complicated. First, make high quality primary care more available. Second, fix how we pay for primary care. We are releasing a discussion draft of a bill tasking Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) to accelerate value-based primary care by creating hybrid payment models for Medicare primary care providers. Hybrid payment start to move away from the failed fee-for-service treadmill by at least partially paying primary care providers based on their patient mix. These hybrid payment models reward providers who provide the best care to their patients. Care that reduces the patient's emergency visits, hospitalizations, excess specialist services, and other big-cost drivers. And these hybrid payment models reward patients with better health. My discussion draft proposes a Technical Advisory Committee to improve how CMS sets Medicare's physician fee schedule. The existing fee schedule has under resourced both primary care services and primary care provider pay, leading to few primary care physicians. One report projects that in a decade the U.S. will face a shortage of between 17 and 45,000 primary care doctors. If good primary care reduces overall costs, as the data suggests, that will be a very expensive primary care physician shortage. One to which the existing fee schedule is leading us. On the reform side, even good alternative payment models stand on the existing fee schedule, hampering the new model's ability to hit that triple aim of better patient experience, better outcomes, and lower costs. Fee schedule reforms could head off that very expensive primary care shortage and at the same time help current primary care providers lower health costs by improving Medicare beneficiaries' health outcomes. So, I encourage my colleagues to work with me as we develop these policies further. Today we'll hear from Chris Koller, the nation's first state health insurance commissioner who put primary care at the center of health spending in Rhode Island and saw lower costs and better outcomes result. He'll explain how reliance on a broken fee-for-service healthcare system limits our potential to scale primary care reforms. We'll hear from Dr. Amol Navathe about how hybrid payment models can strengthen primary care by helping providers innovate, improve care, and lower costs. And we'll hear from Dr. Bob Rauner, a frontline primary care physician, about how payment models affect the care he provides his patients. We've learned a lot since passing the Affordable Care Act about how delivery system reforms can unlock improvements in our healthcare system that drive meaningful cost savings from better care. Now, we can use that learning to make improved care for patients and lower costs for the budget an everyday thing. The reforms contained in my discussion draft would help doctors deliver high quality primary care to many more Americans and improve their health outcomes and lower total healthcare spending because more and better primary care reduces the need for expensive specialty and hospital care. These are savings we achieve with no, none, zero benefit cuts. Let's be very clear about that. These are savings we achieve because patients are healthier. Patients are healthier because they get better primary care and doctors provide better primary care because we reward them for that. Simple tools, but we need to put them to work, and I hope this hearing helps begin that process. And with that, I turn to my distinguished Ranking Member, Senator Grassley. Senator Grassley. Thank you. Chairman Whitehouse. And I will, at the conclusion of Senator Grassley's remarks, I'd like to recognize the Chairman of the Finance Committee who has important jurisdiction in this space for a few remarks as well, Senator Wyden, then we'll proceed to the witnesses. OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR GRASSLEY \2\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \2\ Prepared statement of Senator Grassley appears in the appendix on page 34. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- Senator Grassley. Well, thank you for holding today's hearing on strengthening primary care. Americans spend more than $4.3 trillion annually on health. Our spending has more than tripled as a percentage of Gross Domestic Product since 1960. Growing healthcare costs don't just strain the American pocketbooks, these costs also are a major driver of widening budget deficits in the federal government's unsustainable fiscal outlook. And it's clear that we're not getting our money's worth for all of this spending. Major healthcare programs spending eats up 32 percent of the federal revenue today and will be 45 percent mid-century. Our healthcare system has plenty of waste and inefficiencies that need fixing, increasing transparency and competition, fighting fraud, and getting rid of red tape are some key areas where we ought to find a bipartisan start. We can also do a better job reducing clinical waste by focusing more on prevention and early intervention, reducing inappropriate care, and also improving care coordination. Having access to primary care is key to being able to do all of these things I mentioned. When patients have access to timely primary care, they have better health outcomes and live longer. We're blessed with millions of dedicated and qualified healthcare providers. These individuals care deeply about the quality of care that they provide. I'm proud that Iowa is home to several great institutions that train primary care doctors, physician assistants, nurses, therapists, and too many more to mention. Rural primary care depends on a suite of providers, meaning doctors, physician assistants, nurse practitioners, along with telehealth and other innovations to deliver timely care. To make primary care more accessible and effective, we need to remove federal government barriers, lean on consumer choice and price transparency, and be outcomes based. To often Medicare regulations and payment systems are overly burdensome for physicians. Government driven approaches haven't moved our healthcare system to be more outcome based. The future of Medicare payments to providers and improving access to primary care lies outside of the fee-for-service, so patients and taxpayers can get better value. The key question is how do we actually do that, who's in control, and what can lower costs and at the same time improve health outcomes. Last October, this Committee held a hearing of reducing excess costs in healthcare. I'm glad that we took an accurate account of what's working and not working in reducing our nation's healthcare costs at that hearing. Now, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) has found the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation, a program created to lower costs has not lowered Medicare costs. That's not my judgment. That's CBO. CBO told us what is lowering healthcare spending in Medicare is the Part D program. In the past decade, existing brand name drugs lost their patent protection. As a result of new competition from generic drugs patients are shifting to less expensive generic formulas. This is in line with what we already know from CBO. In the first decade of Part D, it ended up costing taxpayers 36 percent less than projected by CBO and that doesn't happen very often. As then Chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, I was proud to author Medicare Part D. Prescription drug costs are still too high. We need to reform the role of the very opaque middlemen and you know them as PBMs or Pharmacy Benefit Managers, and we need to enact more competition into the drug market. We know that market-based solutions are effective in lowering costs and improving care as we have seen, as I just stated, in Medicare Part D. We should build on these policies, while seniors should get a choice between fee-for-service Medicare and Medicare Advantage. We know that Medicare Advantage (MA) is a growing choice of many seniors. Medicare Advantage can be effective at promoting value in the healthcare by directing resources in primary care and higher quality care. As Medicare Advantage adds more patients and spreads billions of dollars of taxpayers' money, aggressive oversight is needed to root out fraud, waste, and abuse that's been a focus of mine for many years. Finally, we can't talk about waste and inefficiency in healthcare without discussing our country's fiscal situation. According to CBO, the federal budget deficit in the fiscal year that most recently ended clocked in at two trillion dollars and future deficits are projected to be even larger. Growing healthcare spending is a major reason. Healthcare spending can be made more efficient without compromising the quality of care and reducing access, especially in rural areas where access is a major problem. I look forward to this hearing, from our witnesses, and thank them for appearing because this issue of more primary care is very necessary to be solved if we're going to reduce costs. Chairman Whitehouse. We recognize Chairman Wyden for his remarks and then I'll introduce the witnesses. STATEMENT OF SENATOR WYDEN Senator Wyden. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And colleagues, thank you for allowing me this imposition. I'm going to be very brief. Particularly, the Finance members recall that before he retired, we all worked with Chairman Hatch to begin to move Medicare away from being just an acute care program to being one that will deal with chronic illness. The reason that Senator Whitehouse's work is so important is that when we did that, and it was a crucial transformation. When I was coming up, I remember Medicaid was for acute care. You broke your ankle or something like that, you went to the hospital. Now, Medicare, to a great extent, there's cancer and diabetes and heart disease and strokes, and all these chronic illnesses, and primary care, what Chairman Whitehouse is going after here has a key role, colleagues, to play in managing chronic illness. In effect, this is the next step, and I would just say, whether it is grab bars in showers, whether it's transportation assistance, whether it's air conditioning, you can go on and on, but all of it relates to this primary care issue that Senator Whitehouse, who, in addition to his role here as Chairman of the Budget Committee, wears another very valuable hat on the Finance Committee. I think we can all work together and this is the future and Dr. Rauner, I'm going to try and get back. We're working on the tax bill this morning and sort of around the clock, but your point of saying, in particular, that a lot of these primary care services should apply to traditional Medicare, not just MA, is very much in sync with, I think, the forward-thinking work that's going on in healthcare. Chairman Whitehouse is going to lead this effort and we're going to work really closely with him. Colleagues, apologies for the bad manners. Chairman Whitehouse. No, no, when the Chairman of Finance wants to talk about healthcare reforms, we're all ears. First, we'll hear from Chris Koller. Mr. Koller is the president of Milbank Memorial Fund, 115-year operating foundation that works to improve population health and health equity. As I mentioned, he was the country's first health insurance commissioner from Rhode Island from 2005 to 2013. He's a member of the National Academy of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine and on the faculty of Brown University School of Public Health. We'll then hear from Dr. Amol Navathe. Dr. Navathe is an Associate Professor of Medicine and Health Policy at the University of Pennsylvania. He's a practicing internal medicine physician and a health economics researcher. His research focuses on improving the quality and cost efficiency of healthcare through better payment approaches. He currently serves as Vice Chair of the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission. He's previously served at the Council of Economic Advisors and as a leader of the Comparative Effectiveness Research Portfolio for the Department of Health and Human Services. We'll then hear from Dr. Bob Rauner. Dr. Rauner is a family physician who spent the first 15 years of career caring for rural and underserved patients in Nebraska and then spent the past 12 years starting two primary care physician-led accountable care organizations, the Southeast Rural Physicians Alliance ACO in 2012, and then One Health Nebraska ACO in 2016. He serves as president of the Partnership for Healthy Nebraska, a group that works with organizations and communities in Nebraska to address health-related issues impacting those they serve. And he's appearing today as a representative of the American Academy of Family Physicians. We're also joined by Ms. Lisa Grabert. Ms. Grabert is a Visiting Research Professor at Marquette University College of Nursing. Previously, she's worked at the House of Representatives Committee on Ways and Means, the American Hospital Association, and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. And our final witness today will be Dr. Christina Taylor. Dr. Taylor is the Chief Medical Officer for Value Based Care for Clover Health. She is also President-Elect of the Iowa Medical Society. Preivously, Dr. Taylor served as Chief Medical Officer at the McFarland Clinic in Ames, Iowa, where she oversaw the population and value-based healthcare efforts. Dr. Taylor earned her medical degree from the University of Iowa, Carver College of Medicine and completed her internal medicine residency in Des Moines, Iowa. We welcome all of you. Mr. Koller, please proceed. I've got to remember I'm an official here and I can't call you by your first name. STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER KOLLER, PRESIDENT, NILBANK MEMORIAL FUND \3\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \3\ Prepared statement of Mr. Koller appears in the appendix on page 37. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- Mr. Koller. Thank you. Chairman Whitehouse, Ranking Member Grassley, and distinguished members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today. As you hammer out details this week of a spending bill that contained sorely needed funding for community health centers, the National Health Service Corp and teaching health centers, I wanted to focus on the essential nature of primary care and Medicare's role in shaping the country's healthcare system. As Senator Whitehouse noted, in 2005, I assumed the newly created role of Health Insurance Commissioner for the State of Rhode Island. My job was to direct commercial insurers to improve the accessibility, quality, and affordability of the healthcare system. I convened an advisory council of consumers and providers to look at the drivers of healthcare unaffordability in Rhode Island. They found a gravely out of balance healthcare delivery system that depended heavily on specialty care providers and underfunded primary care providers who, when adequately supported, deliver cost effective, preventive urgent, routine, and chronic care. These issues also cripple the Medicare Program and the U.S. healthcare system, in general. As Senator Whitehouse noted, overall, the U.S. spends 50 percent more of its GDP on healthcare than any other country and in return we have somewhere between the 45th and 50th longest life expectancy at birth in the world. In Rhode Island, we implemented a strategy to help rebalance our delivery system. This included a cap on the rate of growth in hospital prices and a requirement that insurers increase the portion of their healthcare spending going to primary care by 1 percentage point a year for five years. By making delivery system rebalancing a priority, since then Rhode Island had catalyzed Medicare ACOs and new ways of paying primary care practices, maintained one of the highest levels of primary care providers per capita in the country, which left the state better prepared to face the COVID-19 pandemic, supported a network of community health centers that serves one in six state residents, inspired 21 other states to report on or increase primary care spending, and we've improved our ranking in the Commonwealth Fund's state health system scorecard to fourth. But most importantly, Rhode Island has greatly improved its health insurance affordability relative to neighboring states. Yet, these efforts amount to sandbags against the relentless flood. Rhode Island is still subject to the grave primary care prices facing the country. The Milbank Memorial Fund's annual health review as a primary care scorecard released last week documented that almost one in three Americans report they lack access to a source of regular care. This figure is increasing most dramatically for children. The number of primary care physicians per person is declining, the share of healthcare dollars going to primary care is less than 1 in 20 and is dropping, and a grim future lies ahead. About one in seven physicians is practicing primary care five years after medical residency. That's not enough to replace those retiring, let alone to match the levels found in other countries. Medicare's fee schedule has created this unbalanced delivery system and primary care crisis. How much and how it pays is not delivering value for the Medicare program or its beneficiaries. Medicare is the benchmark for all of their payers, so this inefficiency has rippled through our entire healthcare system. In 2021, the National Academy of Science, Engineering, and Medicine issued a report on implementing high quality primary care. I was privileged to serve on that committee and in it we studied Medicare's method of healthcare services valuation in the role of the Relative Value Utilization Committee (RUC), an advisory committee appointed by the American Medical Association that assigns value to all physician services paid by Medicare. The nation report concluded 90 percent of the RUC's recommendations are accepted by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. The fee schedule implemented by Medicare systematically devalues primary care services relative to other services. This results in a compensation gap between primary care and other physicians that is widened, driving what specialty medical students chose and what graduate medical education programs hospitals offer. Given the five to one ratio of specialists to primary care physicians on the RUC, these findings are not surprising. The Government Accountability Office and numerous commentators have pointed out the conflicts of interest in this arrangement. How Medicare pays also contributes to the problem. Paying for each service encourages the provision of care more highly valued by the RUC members, procedures and testing, and discourages lower price services and those with no fee valuation that are often used by primary care clinicians, such as patient education, care planning, and services delivered by non-licensed clinicians, all of which help with the chronic conditions cited by Senator Wyden. Fee-for-service payments also discourage investments to improved care, as we'll hear from Dr. Rauner, and leave providers financially vulnerable in times of reduced demand for in-person services, such as during the pandemic. This is a self-perpetuating cycle. A committee dominated by specialists systematically values specialty care over primary care. Commercial payers follow suit. Specialists' income increase, attracting a greater share of medical school students and further destabilizing our delivery system. Medicare and the country spend more and get less. Given this, I offer four recommendations for Congress to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the Medicare physicians fee schedule. First, revise the Medicare physician fee schedule valuation process in the role of the RUC. Second, direct CMS to annually report primary care spending levels across all programs. Third, implement a hybrid payment methodology, a blend of pre-enrollee and fee-for-service payments in the Medicare fee schedule for primary care clinicians and services. And finally, direct CMS to waive Part B cost sharing for all services provided by whomever the beneficiary has designated as their usual source of care. Chairman Whitehouse. Thank you, Mr. Koller. Let me turn now to Dr. Navathe. STATEMENT OF DR. AMOL NAVATHE, ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR, PERELMAN SCHOOL OF MEDICINE, AND THE WHARTON SCHOOL, UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA \4\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \4\ Prepared statement of Dr. Navathe appears in the appendix on page 46. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- Dr. Navathe. Chairman Whitehouse, Ranking Member Grassley, and distinguished members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today. Before I begin my substantive remarks, I would like to emphasize that my comments reflect solely my beliefs and not the opinions of any organization I'm affiliated with, including Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (MedPAC), the University of Pennsylvania Health System or Perelman School of Medicine. Today I would like to highlight how Congress can enable much needed transformation of primary care delivery in our country. I've dedicated a substantial portion of my career to this effort. I led the design of a new primary care payment model, together with Blue Cross Blue Shield of Hawaii. In 2016, we shifted to a hybrid model with a predictable monthly payment, adjusted for the level of patient illness while continuing to pay some services fee-for-service. This gave primary care providers or PCPs flexibility to practice more patient-centered care while streamlining operations. The model's success led the plan to expand it statewide. I would like to share four key points in support of reforming primary care and physician payment. First, there's near consensus amongst health policy experts that robust primary care is required for cost efficient healthcare. Medicare spends only 4 percent of its total spending on primary care, which is far less, proportionally, than other high-income countries. Geographic regions within the U.S. that have more PCPs achieve greater health with lower spending. For example, Medicare spends 25 percent less per beneficiary in states with many PCPs compared to those with few. Second, the current fee- for-service payment system produces a misalignment between provider incentives and patient health. This leads to systematic under investment in primary care. In particular, the payment rates in Medicare's physician fee schedule undervalue diagnostic services in favor of procedural ones. This is an issue throughout the fee schedule and exacerbates the incentive to provide more services by shifting towards costly ones; thus, Medicare spending goes up without producing additional health benefits. Third, granting CMS the authority to pay primary care practices through a hybrid payment model is imperative to strengthen primary care. A hybrid payment model would allow practices to deliver more patient-centered care, change to more efficient staffing models, and use technology like telehealth when it is efficient and effective. The evidence for hybrid payments is promising. In Hawaii, there were marked improvements in quality. This included increased rates of cost- effective prevention like cancer screening, as well as greater cost saving care, such as end of life care planning. To complement quality gains, there was greater use of telehealth that predated the pandemic. In fact, unlike other states where primary care practice finances were massively disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic, practices in Hawaii were protected, financially. The success in Hawaii underscores the stability that hybrid payments can impart to primary care. Fourth, a hybrid primary care payment system is a linchpin for reducing federal spending on healthcare. While not every test of primary care payment reform has yielded overall savings, key leading indicators are positive. Examples of success include a 5 percent reduction in spending on outpatient imaging among Medicare Advantage beneficiaries enrolled in Hawaii's Blue Cross plan. To get a sense of magnitude, this would translate to $368 million in savings if results replicated across the Medicare program. CMS demonstrations lead to reductions in use of expensive hospital care and emergency department visits. The magnitude here reflects $5.4 billion in annual savings if results replicated across traditional Medicare. The ability for primary care to drive savings is also evident through the performance of accountable care organizations or ACOs in the Medicare Shared Savings Program or MSSP. Physician led ACOs are more successful than other ACOs. To date, the MSSP has saved $1.8 billion, but when advanced primary care models with hybrid payments have overlapped with ACOs, the synergies have yielded even larger savings. Hybrid primary care payments cannot be implemented at scale without congressional action. Notably, CMS has conducted demonstration projects with hybrid payments. It also has the authority to implement hybrid payments in the MSSP, which is a step that it should take. However, what we need now must be nationwide and permanent. Demonstration projects, by nature, are time limited and uncertain. This has led to under investment by physician practices and lack of participation from private payers; thus, the full benefits of hybrid payments have not been realized. Only through congressional action can CMS scale hybrid payments pass this tipping point of transformation across the nation. Thank you for the opportunity to share my testimony with you today. Chairman Whitehouse. Thank you very much. Dr. Rauner. STATEMENT OF DR. BOB RAUNER, PRESIDENT, PARTNERSHIP FOR HEALTHY NEBRASKA, AND REPRESENTATIVE, AMERICAN ACADEMY OF FAMILY PHYSICIANS \5\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \5\ Prepared statement of Dr. Rauner appears in the appendix on page 60. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- Dr. Rauner. Chairman Whitehouse, Ranking Member Grassley, and distinguished members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today. As a family physician from Nebraska, I'm honored to be here today representing the 129,600 physicians and student members at The American Academy of Family Physicians, including myself. I spent the first portion of my career practicing in my hometown of Sydney, Nebraska, which is far out west, closer to Wyoming, along with my wife, Lisa, who is also a family physician. We moved there, in part, to replace my family doctor, Doc O'Halloran, who, when I was in medical school, was always telling my mom when is Bob going to come back so I can retire? The next phase of my career, we went to teaching at a family medicine residency program so we could teach others how to become rural family physicians. During that time is when the electronic medical records were coming out and we installed one and joined a research network across the country where we started studying what was working in terms of systematic quality in clinics. The problem was it was really hard to sustain with the fee-for-service payment system. It took extra work and there was no reward for it through fee-for-service. So, I was happy in 2012 when the Medicare Shared Saving Program came out with an advanced payment ACO contract. So, I switched careers again and I recruited nine clinics to join that advanced payment ACO, then we took what I learned from our research networks and employed one of those nine clinics across Nebraska. Within the first two years, we were one of the Top 10 highest quality scoring ACOs in the country as a group of mostly rural family physicians, but we ran into sustainability challenges when the advance payment money ran out, so we started a second ACO in 2016. We started three clinics in Lincoln and then grew that to 23 clinics in four communities. In 2022, we were one of only 11 out of 482 ACOs across the country that had greater than 90 percentile reductions in costs, while also greater than 90 percentile quality numbers. I'd like to point out one of the figures I include in my testimony, and it's our savings over time since our first contract. We had net savings for the first three years, but in those three years we didn't meet the shared savings threshold, so we received no money from Medicare Shared Savings Program. We finally hit it in the fourth year, in 2020, but the reconciliation takes another nine months. So, we actually didn't get our first shared savings payment until the latter half of 2021, a full five years after we started. But we were able to sustain that for two reasons. Number one, Nebraska was one of the Comprehensive Primary Care (CPC) Plus intervention states. That meant for our Medicare patients we got a risk adjustment per member per month payment that was used to hire our care coordinators and fund our operations during that time. In addition, it was a multi-payer option, so Blue Cross/Blue Shield Nebraska also provided a per member per month similar quality metrics, which is why in both the funding and the quality goes across almost half of our payer mix, and it was that investment that got us to the point now where we're 10 percent under budget in Medicare and over 20 percent under budget on our Blue Cross contracts. Shared Savings are possible in year one and two, but sometimes those are false savings due to risk coding or sometimes even denied and delayed care, which can come back to bite you later on. I'm proud to say that One Health Nebraska ACO did it the right way. We achieved true savings by focusing on better chronic disease management, post discharge visits, and increasing our annual wellness visit rates to 85 percent. The combination of fee-for-service, per member per month payments and shared savings actually gets us on those two contracts to a 12 to 13 percent primary care spend rate, the kind of spending that Chris Koller mentions is needed to sustain this kind of high-quality care. I think future ACO contracts should measure primary spend rates as one of the core metrics to make sure the money is actually going to the right place on these contracts. And just like our experience before, I think to recruit more primary care physicians in the ACO contracts we need a model under MSSP that includes both the upfront funding to get you off the ground, but the population-based payments to sustain your operations over time. Thank you for the time to offer this testimony. Chairman Whitehouse. Thank you very much, Dr. Rauner. I've got to say you've got my competitive juices flowing talking about the success of your ACOs because Rhode Island has a couple of superstar ones also. Ms. Grabert, please proceed. STATEMENT OF LISA M. GRABERT, VISITING RESEARCH PROFESSOR, MARQUETTE UNIVERSITY COLLEGE OF NURSING \6\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \6\ Prepared statement of Ms. Grabert appears in the appendix on page 68. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- Ms. Grabert. Chairman Whitehouse, Ranking Member Grassley, and distinguished members of the Committee, I am Lisa Grabert, a Visiting Research Professor in the College of Nursing at Marquette University located in the good land of Milwaukee, Wisconsin. I'm a former congressional staffer for the U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Ways and Means and I'm honored to testify before the Committee today on the Medicare Program, a policy area where I've worked for over 20 years. I applaud the Committee for addressing the important topic of primary care. My written testimony includes several examples from fee-for-service Medicare that were well intentioned, but unfortunately, did not turn out the way many of us had hoped. These programs include Accountable Care Organizations or ACOs, the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation or the CMII, and the Independent Provider Advisory Board or IPAB. But I'm a glass half full kind of person, so I will concentrate my oral testimony on a virtual slam dunk, the expansion of telehealth services. To understand why telehealth was successful, we must first spend time on the economic structure of Medicare Advantage or the MA Program. The Medicare Program relies on a benchmark system for MA plans. The benchmark is set on an annual basis and represents a range of 95 to 115 percent of expected costs and fee-for-service Medicare. A different benchmark is set for each county in the U.S. based on a statutory formula. Each plan submits an annual bid. The bid is reflexive of the services the MA Plan intends to deliver to Medicare beneficiaries and these services must include, at a minimum, what is covered by fee- for-services. These minimum services are referred to as the basic benefit. If an MA plan submits a bid that is lower than the benchmark, the plan receives a rebate. MA plans are required to reinvest a portion of the rebate and plans typically reinvest in premium reductions, reduced cost sharing, and supplemental benefits. These supplemental benefits are key to understanding why telehealth is such an important example to guide future Medicare reform. The bipartisan Budget Act of 2018 included a policy that allows MA plans to offer telehealth as a basic benefit rather than as a supplemental benefit. This bipartisan policy achieved two key things. The first achievement was less taxpayer spending, which manifests as lower annual bids. The Congressional Budget Office, or CBO, estimated the MA telehealth policy saves taxpayers $80 million and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, or CMS, estimated this policy saved beneficiaries $557 million. The second achievement of the policy was freeing up capital within the category of supplement benefits. This economic incentive allows plans to offer new benefits, such as enhanced primary care. In a peer-reviewed study in press, my coauthors, Dr. Grace McCormick, Dr. Erin Trish of the USC Brooking Schafer Center, and Dr. Catherine Wagner of the Marquette College of Business and I concluded that this switch from the supplemental to the basic package is the first of its kind in the Medicare statute. This seemingly small, bipartisan policy change is lightning in a bottle. A similar telehealth policy was implemented on the fee-for-service side. Like the ACO, CMMI, and IPAP examples in the case of fee-for-service telehealth it spends roughly five billion dollars a year. The detailed research I've done on this topic has convinced me that policymakers should solely focus their limited time and resources in Medicare on MA changes, not fee-for-service. If my telehealth example is not convincing enough, just listen to the footsteps of Medicare beneficiaries. They are quickly moving towards MA. Just last year the proverbial scale tipped, and the Medicare Program now consists of more MA beneficiaries than fee-for-service beneficiaries. $13 million new beneficiaries will be added to Medicare over the next 10 years. At a pace of nearly 10,000 Baby Boomers a day, MA is projected to grow 42 percent while for fee-for-service is projected to shrink. The answer to enhancing primary care lies squarely within the Medicare Advantage benefit. Any attempts to force change within fee-for-service are misaligned with the future momentum of the program. I thank you for the opportunity to offer my perspective and I look forward to your questions. Chairman Whitehouse. Thank you very much, and last, but not least, Dr. Taylor. Delighted that you're here. STATEMENT OF DR. CHRISTINA TAYLOR, CHIEF MEDICAL OFFICER, VALUE BASED CARE, CLOVER HEALTH AND PRESIDENT-ELECT, IOWA MEDICAL SOCIETY \7\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \7\ Prepared statement of Dr. Taylor appears in the appendix on page 78. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- Dr. Taylor. I'm Dr. Christy Taylor and I'm an internal medicine physician from Iowa. I practiced for nearly 20 years. I started out in a physician-owned multispecialty clinic, the Iowa Clinic, and I was their first Chief Quality Officer and then I was the Chief Medical Officer, McFarland Clinic where we served both rural and urban patients. And throughout this time, I've also served as the medical director of a multi-state ACO. So, in my career, I've been deeply involved in transitioning our organizations from fee-for-service to value-based care. I've been blessed to work at organizations that historically delivered exceptional care, but even we had to change our focus from that of volume to patient access and coordinating care to deliver the right care to the right patients at the right time. And now, I'm the Chief Medical Officer of the Value Division of Clover Health, an organization which brings support and actionable patient information to primary care providers. So, in all of these settings, a fundamental aspect we focused on is the critical role of primary care providers in coordinating care. Patients who see primary care physicians absolutely have lower overall total cost of care. In my clinic, we focused on both patient access and engagement. We actually improved quality of care and had significantly lower costs and we were successful in our value-based contracts. We received shared savings every single year. The most meaningful results, however, were what we saw in our patient outcomes, both in prevention and in disease management. And most of this work was done by primary care physicians and then we collaborated with other groups around the country to share best practices and challenge ourselves further. Our preventive care increased, things such as vaccines and cancer screenings, and with actionable data and additional personnel we manage chronic disease patients better, such as those with hypertension and diabetes to help them get and stay in better control. This resulted in healthier patients and fewer Emergency Room (ER) and hospital admissions. But along the way to value several investments were necessary. We added additional personnel, such as care managers, plus the technological and analytical resources to make the data actionable. And these resources are outside the scope of what we would call traditional care or regular practice. For example, we put people and processes in place so that we could get real time hospital discharge information so that we could reach out to patients during these vulnerable times in their healthcare and it required both timely data and care managers in place to actually result in true care coordination so that we could have good follow up, reduced medical error, and readmissions prevented. So, across multiple organizations, I've seen the positive impacts that primary care providers who actually focus on value have made. With the right resources we have safer, better care at lower costs. But despite these successes, significant challenges remain; namely, those of investment, administrative burden, and lack of predictability. Transforming care does require significant investment, which small or rural practices either can't afford or accomplish at their scale. There's just a base cost to personnel and then the patient and analytic tools that you need are unaffordable for the small practices, but without these important solutions we don't have the critical information that we need to better care for patients or avoid duplicate services. This is frankly what drew me to my work at Clover so that we could work with the primary care practices and provide them these additional resources so they could serve their patients. In the last several years, providers have experienced a drastic uptick in administrative burden beyond the good medical recordkeeping that you'd normally expect. There's additional recording of information that's not impactful to patient care and this burden is definitely heavier on the primary care physician. We're taking precious time away from patient care duties. Intentionally or not, we are adding strain to a shrinking primary care workforce. We must decrease the administrative burdens that are not directly impacting care. And finally, we need more predictability. Frequent changes in federal requirements and unstable payment arrangements are challenging for all providers, more so the smaller ones. In order for practices to be able to move to value and provide coordination beyond traditional care, we need predictable and sustainable reimbursement models. In summary, primary care providers are the frontline of coordinating care. Patients who see primary care physicians are healthy and at a lower cost. We need to assist the primary care providers to enter and remain in value-based programs. Thank you very much. Chairman Whitehouse. Thank you very much. After the hearing is over, Dr. Taylor, I would invite you to sit down and make me a punch list of the administrative burdens that you think are least helpful and most aggravating and send that to Ranking Member Grassley and myself for us to have in hand as we proceed. And hearing your testimony and Dr. Rauner's testimony makes me want to take you both out for a beer with Dr. Al Puerini, who was the founding Chief Marketing Officer (CMO) of Integra ACO Rhode Island and Dr. Al Kurose who was the founding CMO of Coastal Medical and just let you tell me what we need to do to continue to make those improvements. I really appreciate, Dr. Rauner, particularly your success with the ACOs because I think Coastal and Integra are right up there with you in that uppermost performance corner. Some ACOs were less successful than others and sometimes the ACO program gets, I think, under appreciated because there were unsuccessful programs. There were characteristics, I think, to the very successful program. Dr. Navathe suggested that where there was hybrid payment overlap with the ACO, that boosted success. You said that where it's a primary care physician ACO, uncomplicated existing practice, they were more successful. That is my experience as well and I'd invite you to think about and send in after the hearing, if you like, or if you have a quick answer now, as you look at the whole ACO experiment, what are the things we should take out of it where we got the best wins? What are the things we really need to replicate? And I'll add that I had long wars with the Obama Administration CMS folks about precisely the concerns that you had. I used to tell them that the way you're dealing with shared savings you are starving your lead dogs. You don't want to do that. You want to feed your lead dogs. You want to encourage that kind of behavior and thankfully they did a lot of listening and we were able to make a lot of improvements off where they initially were. So, I take a very keen interest in ACO wellbeing. Any thoughts on that? Dr. Rauner. Yes, a couple of things that shake out and the studies have shown all the way back to 2016 that the ACOs that were achieving the most success were the primary care led ACOs, so this is not new information. That is probably the most fundamental thing and I think a couple things. One is, if a primary care physician led ACO, those primary care doctors are all involved, and they know what they're doing. I've actually talked to colleagues who were employed who don't even know they're in an ACO. So, if you don't know you're in an ACO, you're probably not going to do very well. A key portion of what you're doing, honestly, is behavior change and that takes relationship with the primary care doctor to get your blood pressure and diabetes under control. Without that relationship engagement of primary care physicians, it's really hard to make happy, successful. A second factor is that you're not necessarily locked into anything. So, unfortunately, if you're in a narrow network, they're locked into that narrow network. We're not. So, I can look in Lincoln and actually do know that, for example, sometimes the high-value cardiology in this system while the high-value orthopedist is in another system and someone who's in radiology is in an independent system that's wholly different from the others. Because we're not locked in, we can send them to any of those places and always do the best. One of our first principles in our ACO, when we started it, was we're going to send patients to the same place we're going to send our mom or our kids and we're not going to sign a contract that doesn't let us do that. I'm going to send my mom and our kids to the place where I know is the highest value stuff. And so, I think that's one of the other major things. The third thing is because we're only a primary care led ACO, when the money comes in it stays in the ACO. It gets reinvested in the business. We just keep hiring more and more care coordinators. If I had $200,000, I don't want to buy more technology. I want to hire three more social workers or a couple diabetes educators. Having that team wrapped around you is the core thing. And the other things I see in some employ models the primary care doctors are just plain understaffed. The care coordinators are centralized, and you don't have the relationship when it's a central phonebank person. But once the nurse that you know at the clinic when Lupe calls, you're going to listen to Lupe, and so I think those are kind of the three main things that made the difference for us. Chairman Whitehouse. Mr. Koller, when you were leading the transformation in Rhode Island towards primary care, you were dealing with a lot of statistics and tracking a lot of statistics and seeing how that rolled out into insurance costs and all of that. Did you also have occasion to take on or absorb any of the more sort of experiential gains that Dr. Rauner is talking about, about that improved patient relationship between the primary care doctor and the patient once they're in a mode like that where they're getting these various supports? And it's been my experience that people absolutely loved it when their patients have all these new opportunities that the ACO format and the primary care relationship provided, some of which just doesn't get quantified because it's hard to quantify, but Rhode Island is a small state and I expect you heard a lot of feedback. What was it like? Mr. Koller. Thank you, Senator Whitehouse. I think we did balance this notion of evidence in relationships that you're talking about. So, the evidence is what we talked about here around the value of primary care, but at the core of what Dr. Rauner and Dr. Taylor is describing is a relationship that people have with their clinician and that relationship, that trust that emerges is so important for the patient themselves. And so, that's really what motivated us when we were trying to do this work in Rhode Island. We had the benefit of a strong community health center system with a lot of folks with that kind of trust. We had leading ACOs, as you talked about. Our primary care efforts were really an effort to kickstart those in the way that Dr. Rauner is talking about, to give them upstart funding so they could build those sorts of relationships and it pays off. I also want to note it's especially important when we're concerned about disparities in healthcare because often the source of those disparities is a lack of a trusting relationship. What brings me to this discussion is we're losing those relationships. Almost a third of the folks in the country say they don't have it right now and if we don't rebuild that trusting relationship, Medicare is in deep trouble from a financial and a security standpoint. Chairman Whitehouse. Senator Grassley. Senator Grassley. Dr. Taylor, we heard about how you've achieved results in primary care clinics there. You mentioned achieving increase in vaccines given, cancer screenings that are completed and improved management of high blood pressure patients, Emergency Room patients count is down, so explain to us how we could scale your effective model, so prevention and care coordination happens across the country? And specifically, are physicians empowered to do this now or are there federal barriers? Dr. Taylor. Thank you, Senator Grassley for the question and appreciate the opportunity to answer that. So, there's really two parts to your question. And one is regarding how we scale these efforts and I think there is always difficulty in scaling something you do locally because healthcare and how we deliver it is local, so you have to have different solutions in different places for what makes sense for the patients and their communities. So, you have to have the flexibility and agility to put forth a solution in one community versus another. In a particular area in urban Iowa, we don't have a lot of transportation issues, but you get to rural Iowa or rural Midwest, or other parts of the country and you have significant issues getting people to their doctor's appointments. So, simply stating that transportation is something everyone needs to work on, as an example, would not be something that you would say everyone needs to do the same thing. The point is you have to have flexibility in what your efforts are. We really need a handful of things, universally, across our country for the physicians locally to be able to put forth their initiatives. And that is, we need data and then you need your own tool, regardless of what that is, whether it's telehealth or care managers or technological tools, that you need data, tools, and then you need time, which means you need personnel. You need doctors and nurses to be able to respond and do the outreach in these extra things that are important for coordinating care beyond what's done in just the office visits. And so, these extra things that we're having doctors do that take up more time for paperwork and phone calls that are not patient care, we need to relieve them of those burdens so they can spend the time coordinating the care instead. Senator Grassley. Are there any federal red tape problems to do what you just said? Dr. Taylor. Well, there are several, one of which is that we don't have a reimbursement model currently in the fee-for- service side, which does appropriately reimburse physicians to do these extra things beyond office visit care. At least in Medicare Advantage and sometimes in the ACOs, we have more flexibility there. There's supplemental benefits. There's incentives that you can provide to primary care offices, and so, when I've worked with various Medicare Advantage companies over the years, they incentivize primary care offices to make sure that your patients were seen to work on preventive measures, to make sure the quality of care was ensured. And so, making sure that we have a predictable, but yet, able to reimburse us for the extra things beyond office care is one of those. And then there are multiple, which we'll be happy to work with you afterward, and provide a detailed list of the small details which just take up an enormous amount of physician and nursing time. Senator Grassley. Thank you. And then I want to ask Ms. Grabert, your testimony spoke about 2018 expansion to telehealth in Medicare Advantage, saved Medicare money and laid the groundwork for expanding telehealth utilization during the pandemic. In fee-for-service Medicare telehealth expansion costs money. Is Medicare Advantage an effective model for expanding primary care benefits for seniors while also lowering Medicare spending? Ms. Grabert. Thank you for the question, Senator Grassley. Yes, I do think that Medicare Advantage is the program to look at for expanding primary care. One of the things I mentioned in my written testimony is that Medicare uses what's called value- based insurance design or VBID, for Medicare Advantage plans. And in those experiments, which are similar to ACOs on the fee- for-service side, they've identified a number of services that you may want to think about potentially treating in the same way you looked at telehealth in the 2018 bill. Some of those examples under VBID for Medicare Advantage are cost sharing reductions for medications, non-emergency transport, which has been mentioned a few times already, healthy food and grocery options, annual wellness and routine physicals, smartphones, broadband, and Internet, roadside assistance, and minor home repairs. These are services that Medicare beneficiaries are getting under MA through the VBID model, but those are small in nature, and they should be considered for a nationwide expansion. Senator Grassley. Thank you. Chairman Whitehouse. Senator Johnson. STATEMENT OF SENATOR JOHNSON Senator Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You know when I was growing up, we had primary care physicians. We called them family doctors and those doctors would doctor to the parents and then the children as the children became adults. We don't have that anymore and I guess what drives me nuts about these hearings is we're just now looking at the root cause. We're not going back in history and examining how did we go from family doctors to a hearing right now where we're saying what we need is family doctors. And I guess I would argue what changed is the third-party payer system. We have a completely broken healthcare financing system which incentivizes specialties, that disincentivizes primary care physicians, family doctors and until we recognize that reality, we're not going to fix the problem. It wasn't that many decades ago that the patients paid about 90 cents on the dollar. Now, they pay 10 cents, so we've taken consumerism out of this. We have physicians--80 percent used to be independent. Now, 80 percent are part of organizations, and they are told how to practice medicine. They follow protocols. They follow guidelines. And I think we saw during COVID if they have a different perspective, they're vilified, and their careers are destroyed at times. So, I think the solution here is we have to put physicians again at the top of the treatment pyramid as opposed to being crushed at the bottom by all the bureaucracy. We've talked about chronic disease. I'll ask you, Dr. Rauner, what research is being done to determine what is the root cause of the chronic disease? Again, I've heard that we've gone from something like 6 percent of the population to chronic disease to the Rand Study saying 60. I don't know what the start point is, but I think you'd probably agree. I think most people agree we've really got a real problem with chronic disease. What are we doing to figure out what caused it as opposed to how do we treat it? We need to figure out how to treat it, but the best thing is how to prevent it. Dr. Rauner. Well, a couple things. We actually still do have family doctors and then in Lincoln, Nebraska we're back to almost 75, 80 percent are independent because of these contracts, so we're actually reversing the trend in Lincoln. And my niece, Brenna, is finishing up her family medicine residency in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. I hear, unfortunately, she might be staying in Wisconsin, so there's still some in Wisconsin. Senator Johnson. God's country. Dr. Rauner. And then, we actually know exactly what's causing the increased chronic disease is lack of exercise, poor nutrition, and obesity. That's what's driving it. One of my biggest fears, honestly, is the burden of the disease is growing while our primary care workforce is shrinking, which is a recipe for disaster in the next 10 years, so we need to figure out---- Senator Johnson. Let me stop right there, okay, obesity. You say lack of exercise. What about what we're putting into our foods? Dr. Rauner. Oh, yes. Senator Johnson. I'm reading more and more pretty scary information, for example, on glyphosate. It used to be used as a pre-emergent weed killer. Now, we find out it's a desiccant and now we're spraying it on food and it's in our food. I mean, are we really seriously researching some of these issues? Dr. Rauner. Yes. And it's actually something we're working on. And so, you drink basically coffee in the morning and water during the day, and maybe a beer in the evening, but it's all the stuff in the beverages we drink, the sugar, the sweeteners, all the additives. So, it's partly the calories. The calories we drink are actually the biggest problem in obesity, but it's the processed food. You should eat the food that, frankly, your great grandmother recognized as food. A lot of what we buy off the counter your great grandmother would not recognize it as food. She'd say what the heck is that. And then, on top of that, we just don't have people walking as much. I mean two of my daughters live overseas and when we go visit them it's hard not to walk 12 or 15,000 steps a day. In Lincoln, Nebraska, you can get by with 4,000 and so those are the root causes. Senator Johnson. Doctor, real quick, do you know what percentage of drugs being prescribed are being prescribed off label? It's a significant percentage. Correct? Dr. Taylor. A significant percentage, yes. I can't give you a precise number. Senator Johnson. I held an event on Monday and one of the doctors who testified at that event just talked about the molecules, all these generic drugs that there were studies, observational studies proved to be effective in treating COVID. None of those were recommended. Actually, a lot of them were sabotaged by the federal health officials all in favor of the patentable drugs that are extremely expensive and the point being is there's just no avenue for us to explore and do research on generic drugs for different conditions than what they're originally designed for. Would you think that's a problem? Dr. Taylor. Well, I think, as a physician, you're brought back to our first responsibility is to do no harm and we all live by that. And frankly, I don't prescribe a medicine if I don't feel that I have to prescribe a medicine. The best medicine is no medicine if you don't need it. And then, frankly, we use lifestyle interventions and try to find things beyond or before prescribing medicines. And then, you have to look at the side effect profile in the individual patient, so truly, you need to match the disease to the cure. And I don't know that I can give you an answer in terms of how much work is being done on generic---- Senator Johnson. I would like to think that most doctors take your approach to like not use the medicines, but I don't think that's really the reality. I think we're pushing pharmaceutical drugs and products to treat these chronic diseases left and right and really not paying attention to adverse events the way we should, but that's my own personal opinion, but thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Whitehouse. Let me drop in one question as Senator Van Hollen gets settled. And if I may ask, Dr. Navathe, what started the Hawaii hybrid? What's its origin story and who had to approve it? Dr. Navathe. Thank you, Senator, for the question. So, there was an enterprising CEO at the Blue Cross/Blue Shield of Hawaii named Mike Gold, who, as he was planning his retirement, who said I want to do something that will really change the health and the course of health in Hawaii. Just like the rest of the country, there was increasing obesity, there was increasing diabetes because of it and so he convened a set of national experts and local folks, including physicians, including current Governor Josh Green was there as well. And we debated, basically, what are the best ways to really catalyze health system change. And the leading candidate was let's really invest in primary care and let's change the system toward one that provided more stability and robust infrastructure. And luckily, Blue Cross/Blue Shield Hawaii actually has something like 60 percent market share, so when they said, hey, we're going to shift over it really did catalyze some system transformation and that's what kind of set the foundation. Chairman Whitehouse. My Ranking Member has to leave and has asked to ask one more question before he goes. Senator Van Hollen has very courteously agreed to that, so let me turn to Senator Grassley and then Senator Van Hollen. Senator Grassley. Thank you for your deference. Just one question to Dr. Taylor, and it's not a long one. But you talked about supporting small and rural primary care practices as very important. So, tell me how can partnerships between Medicare Advantage plans and primary care practices improve access to primary care? Dr. Taylor. Thank you, Senator, for that question regarding rural physicians, which are absolutely crucial for providing patient care across this country. There's a couple of things that Medicare Advantage companies and, frankly, all pairs. In this case, you asked about Medicare Advantage companies. There's a few things that you can do to help provide the relationship or encourage the relationship between patients and primary care. And that's, first of all, having an open relationship where the pairs are able to actually talk with the doctor practices, or at least their administration, to let them know here's who your patients are. Sometimes it's just as simple as that, is letting the physicians know here is who your patients are and they provide information to the patients to help encourage a visit with the primary care doctor. So, first and foremost, it's literally trying to encourage the patient to have a personal relationship with their physician. In the Medicare Advantage sites, specifically, we also have incentives for primary care physicians. Please get your patients in for a primary care visit this year. Those incentives work. They allow you to have the ability to hire additional staff to do outreach to your patients and bring these people in for their necessary preventive treatments. Chairman Whitehouse. Thank you, Ranking Member Grassley. Senator Van Hollen. STATEMENT OF SENATOR VAN HOLLEN Senator Van Hollen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank all of you for your testimony today. I appreciate the good comments about Hawaii's innovative systems for addressing some of these issues. As many of you know, Maryland has also developed some innovative models to reduce health spending while improving the quality of care, including the State's all payer model and what we have now, which is the total cost of care model, a key component of which is the Maryland Primary Care Program. In fact, according to a recent Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA) study, the Maryland Primary Care Program had outcomes when it came to treating Medicare patients and COVID that not only lowered the COVID-19 caseload, reduced hospitalization death rates, but also found that the office visits did not decrease because of the prospective payment model. So, Mr. Koller, I know, at least in your written testimony, you mentioned the Maryland model. Can you elaborate on how more efficient health spending and care delivery results from models like Maryland's, the aim, of course, as I said, to reduce hospital spending and incentivizing high quality primary care. Mr. Koller. Thank you, Senator Van Hollen, and you're absolutely right. Maryland has been an innovator in this area. We're very familiar with the Maryland work. We salute it. We've actually published some of the findings there. What's important in the Maryland work, is as you note, the idea of putting the entire system on a budget, a budget which actually benefits health systems and hospitals because it gives them an assured revenue, much as what we're talking about today for primary care physicians. And that, as you note, the Maryland Primary Care Program. It has been a partnership between CMS. And to Dr. Navathe's comments, a large Blue Cross organization, so you have dominant payers and the results have been really significant, specifically in the JAMA study that you cited, we also published it, a 20 percent lower mortality rate during COVID for practices that were enrolled in that Primary Care Program. It is a sterling example of what a combination of hybrid payments, care transformation, and persistence can produce that has saved lives in Maryland and it's what we're trying to replicate for the entire Medicaid beneficiaries. Senator Van Hollen. Well, thank you for those comments because I do believe that it, and maybe Hawaii. I'm less familiar with the Hawaii model, but those kinds of models can be important. Dr. Navathe, could you just take a moment to pick up on what Mr. Koller was discussing and how hybrid primary care payment models work to mitigate against the challenges that we find in a solo fee-for-service model and how the hybrid models can better support a whole patient and team-based care? Dr. Navathe. Thank you, Senator, for the question. So, I think as the Maryland model very nicely exhibits, the hybrid payments with a fixed perspective payment that's going to the practices it allows them to invest in infrastructure, allows them to staff in a way that reflects what is most efficient to deliver care and meet the patients where they are. So, for example, telehealth for a patient who wants to do a telehealth visit or an in-person visit for somebody who wants to do that, it allows them to use technology most efficiently. But one thing I'd also like to highlight right alongside that is it reduces administrative burden, right? Instead of getting these tickie-tack codes where I have to code this and code that where actually coding is more costly than the payment you receive. It unshackles them from that system. It allows them to invest in ways, as you highlighted, that can really improve preventive care. Senator Van Hollen. Got it. Thank you very much. Thank you all for your testimony. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Whitehouse. Let me follow up on that, if I may, because a number of you have mentioned the administrative burdens. Folks like Dr. Rauner, who started an ACO, had to live in an even worse environment where they had to run the fee-for- service system while they built the ACO system. So, the administrative burden actually went up during that process. You're suggesting that a proper hybrid system drops a lot of that reporting and coding out. That has been the experience in the Hawaii hybrid. Dr. Navathe. Yes. Thank you, Senator, for that question. Yes, that's absolutely right. So, because the Blue Cross/Blue Shield of Hawaii maintains so much market share, it's able to push past that tipping point where practices can actually shift over their operations. Chairman Whitehouse. And just count on that one payment model, basically. Dr. Navathe. Correct. And so, they don't have to worry so much about coding the Transitional Care Management (TCM) code or Chronic Care Management (CCM) code or whatever that code is. They can really focus on caring for patients because the revenue is coming in the door. Chairman Whitehouse. I'm told that we have another member coming, so I get to indulge in a few more questions. So, this may not be quite the right way to think about it, but the way I think about it is that if you were building a house you would hire your general contractor and your general contractor would deal with the electrician, the plumber, the tile person, the carpenters, and all of that. And if you had a problem, you'd go to the general contractor and say could you please fix it. That is a pretty basic and efficient and effective model. And it strikes me that trying to move primary care physicians into the general contractor model so that you go through the primary care practice to get to the specialist would provide a much better handle on the over deployment of specialists care. And also, as you said, Dr. Rauner, lets you have a little bit of a better-quality judgment about where the best places are to send patients to. This gets particularly interesting with ACOs because I can remember Dr. Kurose and Dr. Puerini saying we actually bill about 14 percent, I think was the number, of our patient cost of care. That's the part that we directly control. The other 86 percent is specialists, it's hospitals, it's stuff that we don't control. So, when we take on these risks, we're way leveraged with stuff that is beyond our control. So, presumably, not only could better general contractor status for primary care folks reduce the excess utilization of specialist services, but it could also deleverage the risk for ACOs. So, I don't know if that makes sense to you all as a model, but let me ask Dr. Rauner first and then Dr. Navathe, and Mr. Koller what you think about that, and I'll turn to Dr. Taylor if there's time. Dr. Rauner. I think a lot of primary care doctors would agree with that model, that they are basically kind of the general contractor when done right. Now, some people just don't have one and they do get random people from everywhere. I think that's one of the problems is how do you know that it's the right orthopedic surgeon or the right oncologist and that's why we started with our principles. I'll send them to the same place I would send my mom or my kids. So, the orthopedic surgeon I'd encourage, I know the group he's with, and literally, I got operated on there and so did my mom. But one thing the ACO gives---- Chairman Whitehouse. But how do you reward your patients for going to the provider of your recommendation and should the system, in some way, encourage primary care selected specialist rather than people who just go to their cousin's friend, the specialist, and start their care there? Dr. Rauner. Well, I think most of the time you just don't need that, honestly. So, like there was a time where people liked the, gatekeeper model, which we didn't really like at all because I don't like being in that position to tell you, no, you can't see that person. But most people, if they've been seeing you for years, they trust your judgment and really that's how you say it. It's like this is where I'd send my mom. They're like, okay, I'm good with that. I don't have to give them a lot of data. Although, in the past, I'd say most of us physicians had no data to go by. I think with these models now we actually do have data. I've got a spreadsheet on my laptop where I literally have the orthopedic surgeons in town with observed to expected outcomes. It tends to confirm what I already knew, thankfully. But there's a big difference, unfortunately. I wish I could say every physician in the United States was equally good, but I can't say that. And so, we (A) have the data to know and (B) like Dr. Taylor said, every community's healthcare is local. And if you don't know the specifics about this community-- Lincoln and Omaha are only 60 miles away, but they're totally different medical communities. And knowing that, having that local knowledge is really essential. Chairman Whitehouse. Let me hold off on that with Senator Padilla here and recognize Senator Padilla for his questioning. We'll probably wrap up after that, so while I'm thinking of it, if Dr. Navathe or Mr. Koller would like to respond to that and take my question as a question for the record and put any thoughts in writing about how to improve on the primary care general contractor model that would be helpful to me, anyway. Senator Padilla. STATEMENT OF SENATOR PADILLA Senator Padilla. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and thank you to the witnesses for our participation today. During and following the COVID pandemic, we witnessed dramatic increases in emergency department visits for mental health emergencies of all types, including suspected suicide attempts. This uptick has been particularly pronounced among children. I'm sure you've all read the reporting that I have. To properly address the crisis, mental health professionals, including child and adolescent psychiatrists need to meet children where they are. The thing is as professionals, we all can agree to that. This includes in primary care settings, in pediatricians' offices, many times in schools, but I understand that providers have faced difficulties in aligning mental health services with existing billing codes. However, I also understand that there's many innovative models out there, including the collaborative care model that offer primary care providers a way to both bill and be reimbursed for the integration of behavioral health managers and psychiatrists into their practice. The question is for Mr. Koller. How can integrative behavioral care models such as collaborative care and child psychiatry access programs help increase access to mental and behavioral health providers, particularly for underserved populations? Mr. Koller. Thank you very much, Senator. I would second your remarks about, first, the behavioral health crisis and then the ability of primary care to contribute to that. And there are numerous demonstrations that properly trained, and properly resourced primary care clinicians can both provide frontline behavioral healthcare and then the collaborative care model that you're talking about. A number of the things that we've talked about today, the idea of a hybrid payment or paying on a per-patient fee allows primary care practices to build the capacity to hire social workers to develop other staff to do the kind of screening necessary to implement behavioral health model. And I guess the other piece I would add is that we have numerous examples within the community health centers which have not been shackled by Medicare fee schedule where they've been able to build exactly that capacity to meet the needs of kids that you've been so adamant about. Thank you. Senator Padilla. And just a couple of follow ups for you, do you see any benefit these models present in addressing the workforce shortages, both in the physical and the mental areas? Mr. Koller. Yes, we're extremely concerned about workforce shortage. We, being the Milbank Memorial Fund. We think, to Senator Whitehouse's comments, we're worried that there aren't going to be enough general contractors. We support the model. We just don't think we're training enough general contractors and the root of that is the Medicare fee schedule. We have to create incentives for physicians, clinicians, advanced practitioners who are training to choose primary care so that we can build the kind of capacity that you're talking about. Senator Padilla. So, that increased efficiency through the collaborative model for your much needed resources. Mr. Koller. Absolutely. Senator Padilla. And then, another follow up. There's 33 states that have adopted some sort of collaborative care model. What can we do to encourage those that haven't yet to do so? Mr. Koller. Well, particularly given your concern, and it's entirely appropriate about underserved populations, I would look at the catalytic role of Medicaid programs. Medicaid serves almost one half of the kids in the country. Congress has authority over that and can work with Center for Medicaid and CHIP Services (CMCS) to create incentives for states to develop that kind of capacity, whether it's through managed care programs through their fee-for-service. So, I think Medicaid is a powerful lever to spread the kind of work that you're talking about. Senator Padilla. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Chairman Whitehouse. Senator Kaine. STATEMENT OF SENATOR KAINE Senator Kaine. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And to the Chair and Senator Grassley for having this important hearing. I want to ask a question about the way to support diverse healthcare providers in innovative models that we are rolling out, value- based models. And let me talk about a primary care physician who practices in Richmond named Lerla Joseph. I've known Dr. Joseph since I was on the City Council and Mayor. She's an African American woman. She serves predominantly African American community in Richmond, Virginia. Her patients are more likely to be uninsured or underinsured and they're more likely to have multiple chronic conditions that require significantly complex management. When the Affordable Care Act (ACA) was passed, Dr. Joseph saw the growth of value-based care movement as an opportunity to look for new ways to provide care for her patients. And since then, she has successfully participated in accountable care models, resulting both in cost savings, but also improved patient outcomes. But as part of this journey, she's realized that we, as Congress, but also the CMMI could do more to support diverse providers, rural providers, small providers. As she says, equality is one thing, but equity is another. She believes a lot of the focus on building these value-based care models have focused on larger providers and not necessarily those serving rural or minority communities. Not every provider is starting from the same starting point. Some need more support than others to make the transition of value-based care. And it seems obvious to me that we could do more to support diverse providers and we should. So, perhaps I'll just start with you, Dr. Navathe. What more can Congress in the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation do to support diverse providers serving their communities when it comes to these value-based care innovations? Dr. Navathe. Thank you, Senator, for this very important question. So, I think, just taking one quick step into the root cause might help understand. So, when CMMI typically tests modeling, it tests in a voluntary framework where providers have to raise their hand and say I want to join. Perhaps it's not surprising then that well-resourced providers who can bear risks and can make investments end up joining and so we don't get a representative population. We then look at the results and the practice innovations for those models and we try to scale them and that doesn't always work for diverse populations. So, I think as we think about what CMMI and others can do to help kind of boils down to maybe three things. One, we need models that are really truly directed towards safety net providers, toward rural providers, toward providers that take care of diverse populations so there's increased investment in technical support for them. Secondly, when we do voluntary models, we have to check for representativeness. We have to make sure that we're actually getting participation from those or create better incentives for that to happen. And third, rethink this paradigm of voluntary to mandatory. This idea of we're just going to let whoever raises their hand then scale what happens. We may have to rethink that to begin with. Senator Kaine. Can I then, Mr. Chairman, get on a soapbox here that I wasn't intending to get on, but based on Dr. Navathe's answer, this equality versus equity thing some people seem to be really worried about the word ``equity.'' And yet, you've just given a perfect example. Participation in a program first-come-first-served, raise your hand, that is as equal as can be, but it's not going to produce the right health outcome. It's not. When we started to finally deploy vaccines that were developed in COVID, we said anybody over 65 can get them. That's as equal as can be, but we found after about three months of that was some people over 65 don't know how to use a computer. And in my neighborhood, they were searching Walgreen's has it today and then it's the CVS across town. Those had the computer and the time to use it, they were getting vaccines. And those who didn't have the computer or didn't have the time to use it or had a day job, even if they were over 65 and didn't have the time to spend, they were not getting vaccinated and then 90 days into the vaccination rollout, the communities that were getting hit hardest with COVID were being under vaccinated compared to others. Now, everyone is eligible if you're age 65. That is an equality policy. There's nothing unequal about that, but it was producing an inequitable result that was actually hurting the health outcomes of the people who were most affected by COVID. So, we actually learned as we're then in the deployment of vaccines and we switched to models where we're going to do vaccine clinics in public housing communities. We're going to do vaccine clinics in rural places where folks might not have the CVS so close to them that somebody else does. And then, over time, the vaccination rates started to sort of more equalize among the population, but to do that we had to be intentional about it. And in the health space, I can think of about 50 examples of this where the policy that is an equality policy is not going to produce an equitable result. But maybe more importantly, it's not going to produce the result that's right in terms of health outcomes that we're seeking. And so, I really appreciate you sharing that answer. And Mr. Chair, I'll yield back to you. Chairman Whitehouse. Senator Braun. STATEMENT OF SENATOR BRAUN Senator Braun. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I've got a variety of subjects to talk about. Sixteen years ago, this whole malaise that encompasses the healthcare part of our economy was sick and tired of how lucky I was that my costs are only going up 5 to 10 percent a year, had a business that had nearly 300 employees then. For 17 years prior, probably had 20 to 25. It was a much smaller part of our GDP. Didn't have to worry very much about it. But to really get a grip on it, I was large enough to self-insure, which they didn't tell me the year before because they were making so much on the prior plan. And then I poured everything and the kitchen sink at prevention and wellness and then did what it took then to create healthcare consumers out of my employees. You know what happened? We've not had a premium increase for my employees in over 15 years. That's unheard of, but it was so simple to do. So, my first question is going to be on a particular part of healthcare reform that involves hospitals. And I'm going to start with Ms. Grabert. Site-neutral pricing, you know what that is. You know how the big hospital chains end up buying all these other places, all of a sudden jack up the costs based on overhead factors. This is very simple here. What is that doing in our healthcare costs when they buy places that were doing it for less money and for no reason end up jacking up the prices and keep the competitive prices that were in place all of a sudden, they're gone. Explain what site-neutral is to people out there who may not understand it clearly. Ms. Grabert. Thank you for the question, Senator Braun. I'm a big fan of your Site-based Invoicing and Transparency Enhancement (SITE) Act. It's a bipartisan bill that's been introduced in the Senate and it targets a payment peculiarity within fee-for-service Medicare. I call it a peculiarity where outpatient offices receive what's called a facility fee for the services they provide. The same services could be provided in an independent primary care office, and they do not receive the facility fee, so there's a discrepancy in the reimbursement rates that Medicare pays, and it hurts the competition, it incentivizes things like consolidation, which are not good for the healthcare system, and it costs Medicare beneficiaries more. Medicare beneficiaries pay a percentage of cost sharing for every service that they have. If a facility fee is something that they're exposed to, they pay more out-of-pocket every time they go to that outpatient facility versus an alternative like the physician office. So, it's not good for the healthcare system, it's not good for competition, and it's not good for Medicare beneficiaries. Senator Braun. Well put. And with all that, I've got a Democratic sponsor, Senator Hassan, and Senator Kennedy on my side. Every senator ought to be on that if we're wanting to lower costs. Ms. Grabert. I agree. I think every senator should be on that bill. Senator Braun. Okay. I knew you would. Dr. Taylor, when it comes to healthcare transparency and competition, which was the hallmark of what I did. I've got another bill out there that was introduced, believe it or not, with me and Chairman Sanders of the Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions Committee, with the simple idea that if we are going to bring costs down for the government or through the private pay plans, we've got to have information that everyone can see to make an educated decision on what kind of healthcare they want. What do you think for hospitals and insurers; is it going to be wise to have them list, in not a cryptic form, prices of everything they're doing, even some of the agreements they make between themselves to try to cloak all of it to keep us from being healthcare consumers? Dr. Taylor. Thanks, Senator Braun, I appreciate the opportunity here. First of all, I guess I would applaud your shining a light on the need for cost transparency. The first thing I think we do is we start with our medical students and our residents in training and teach them about cost of care. It's often not even part of our training to understand costs, even as physicians. So, one of the things you've heard throughout testimony today is we've each talked about the importance of their being either a physician led something, physician led ACO, a physician led organization. So, you need to bring providers to the center of the organization and expect us to pay attention to costs. And when you have a physician led ACO or organization, then you're putting that in the driver's seat there. So, it helps when we all know that we are supposed to be caring about costs. And then on the transparency side, I'll use your site neutrality as a perfect example. Most people, general population, laypersons are not aware that getting their screening colonoscopy in an outpatient center would be a different cost than doing it in a hospital. It's not quite as simple as saying it's just listing the costs, but they should be aware that there is a cost difference and then they should be educated to ask is there a reason that I need to get this at a higher cost site of services? Senator Braun. One of the other things we did was a pre- biometric screening, and it was one of the best investments I ever made. Dr. Rauner, would you want to briefly weigh in on this topic as well? Dr. Rauner. Yes, I tell people my single biggest surprise taking on this role is I knew there was price variation and I always thought it was 20, 30 percent. In Lincoln, Nebraska, it's tenfold, and one of our biggest challenges was figuring it out, actually. And so, although it took us a while for Medicare, we actually saved money pretty quickly with our commercial plan because we figured it out, but we didn't do it with information they gave us. We did it with information on our Explanation of Benefits (EOB) for our own family members because they have to tell us what they asked us to pay. And so, we quickly realized, for example, in my own EOBs and other colleagues, we started looking at how much--because it's $1,800 to $8,000 for a colonoscopy, depending on where you went, same gastroenterologist, same scope, same meds. It's simply the site. The lab was a tenfold difference. So, if you could figure that out, and what consumer wouldn't want to figure that out, the problem is we found that the insurance companies had often had gag clauses where they couldn't share the information with us, so we had to find creative ways to figure that out. But boy, you can save a lot of money, and then the biometrics are huge. There's some employee wellness that's done right and there's some employee wellness that's done wrong, so I congratulate you for going the biometric route. That's really how you have to make---- Senator Braun. Thank you so much. It's prevention, wellness, competition, transparency. Everybody else lives with competition and transparency. The healthcare industry ought to as well. Dr. Rauner. Amen. Senator Braun. Thank you. Chairman Whitehouse. Thank you all. I very much hope that your testimony and all of the responses and engagement from my colleagues create a platform for some really important bipartisan work. I think it is very clear, almost indubitably clear, that by reforming the payment system we can free up innovation and better patient response to primary care providers. We can reward them better so that the primary care cost reduction effect has more sway through the healthcare system, that patients will enjoy better outcomes, and a way better patient experience in that environment, and that the shackles of a pure fee-for-service system are not helpful as we move forward. And each of you from different academic, policy, practitioner, and legislative backgrounds, I think, have contributed to that message. So, I hope that we can continue to go forward to build bipartisan legislation that will achieve those goals. And to those of you who I asked to provide a response to a question for the record in writing, you have a chance to deliberate about it, please do so. We would ask that they be answered as quickly as possible. If there are other questions for the record that members would like to ask, we'll send them to you. Those are due by noon tomorrow or else forget it. So, if anybody comes in by noon, we'll let you know. If not, you're off the hook with only the questions that are pending. Let me thank you very much for appearing before the Committee today. You provided very, very thoughtful and helpful full written statements and those will be part of the record of the hearing. Thank you for the diligence of the long, full statements that you prepared. And again, if we do get you question, if you could get answers back to us within seven days that helps us conclude the process of this hearing. With no further business before the Committee, the hearing is adjourned.   