A BLUEPRINT FOR PROSPERITY: EXPANDING HOUSING AFFORDABILITY
----------
WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 31, 2024
Committee on the Budget,
U.S. Senate,
Washington, DC.
The hearing was convened, pursuant to notice, at 10:00
a.m., in the Dirksen Senate Office Building, Room SD-608, Hon.
Sheldon Whitehouse, Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
Present: Senators Whitehouse, Merkley, Kaine, Van Hollen,
Padilla, Johnson, Brown, Marshall, Braun and R. Scott.
Also present: Democratic Staff: Dan Dudis, Majority Staff
Director; Josh Smith, Budget Policy Director; Tyler Evilsizer,
Senior Budget Analyst; Connor Jennings, Budget Analyst.
Republican Staff: Chris Conlin, Deputy Staff Director;
Krisann Pearce, General Counsel; Ken Acuna, Professional Staff
Member; Ryan Flynn, Staff Assistant.
Witnesses:
Ms. Peggy Bailey, Vice President for Housing and Income
Security, Center on Budget and Policy Priorities
Mrs. Carol Ventura, Executive Director, RIHousing
Mr. Kevin Boyce, Commissioner, Franklin County Board of
Commissioners
Mr. Bill Slover, Principal, AVCO Interests, LLC
Dr. Todd Walker, Walter Professor of Financial Economics,
Indiana University
OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN WHITEHOUSE \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Prepared statement of Chairman Whitehouse appears in the
appendix on page 30.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chairman Whitehouse. Good morning, the hearing of the
Budget Committee will come to order. We continue to extend our
very best wishes and affectionate and regards to Senator
Grassley, who is actually here. He and I encountered each other
at the vote last night and he was his usual, cheerful self and
we hope will be back, but in the meantime, Senator Johnson has
been kind and courteous enough to stand in for him as the
Ranking Member, so I'm grateful to Senator Johnson for that. I
welcome all the witnesses. We are here this morning to discuss
how investments in expanding housing affordability can drive
American economic growth.
For decades, our country has faced a housing affordability
problem. It's a market failure many years in the making and the
2008 financial crisis and the COVID-19 pandemic didn't help.
After the housing market collapsed in 2008, the new housing
supply for single and multiunit buildings declined. Even as
demand recovered, supply continued to lag.
Now, housing is taking up a larger share of American's
household budgets and low- and middle-income families are being
priced out of the market. Owning a home, once seen as a
foundational piece of the American dream, is further out of
reach for more Americans than ever before. The National
Association of Realtors finds that first-time homebuyers made
up just 26 percent of homebuyers in 2022 compared to 38 percent
in 1981. And today, the typical age of a first-time homebuyer
has risen to a record high of 36 years old, up from 29 years
old in 1981.
With fewer people able to purchase homes, more people must
rent and that's created a shortage of rental units driving up
the cost of rent. New research finds that half of all renters
in the United States spend more than 30 percent of their income
on rent and utilities, more than at any other time in history.
Across the country the U.S. faces a shortage of four to seven
million housing units available for sale or rent.
In Rhode Island, there are currently no communities where
families earning the state's median income can afford to buy a
typical home and there's only one town where Rhode Islanders
earning the state's median income can affordably rent.
According to Zillow, the Providence area experienced the
largest year-over-year rent increase in the country last year,
a 7.5 percent increase.
The squeeze is bad for our entire economy. It's bad for
income inequality, it's bad for families, and it's particularly
bad for young people. I've heard from young people around Rhode
Island about the importance of affordable housing and I intend
to do something about it. Unaffordable housing decreases job
retention and lowers productivity. It can force businesses to
relocate, taking job opportunities with them. A lack of
available housing reduces local tax revenue, reducing local
resources for education, public safety, and infrastructure.
Nationwide, the shortage of affordable housing
opportunities cost the American economy an estimated two
trillion dollars each year. High housing costs reduce
disposable income and economic mobility, stifling economic
opportunity. Investing in our nation's housing infrastructure
would provide relief to millions of Americans and drive
economic growth, particularly in local economics.
Helping families have a safe, stable place to call home
should not be controversial. This isn't Red state versus Blue
state. It's not urban versus rural. Americans in all 50 states
struggle with higher housing costs. Today there's not a state,
metropolitan area, or county where a worker earning the local
minimum wage at 40 hours a week can afford a modest, two-
bedroom rental at the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development's (HUD) fair market rate standard.
As a nation, we underinvested in housing. It's created a
harmful situation for millions of families, and it is now a
significant drag on our economy, so we can and must take action
to ensure housing is safe and affordable for all. The Biden-
Harris Administration has taken sweeping new steps to increase
the housing supply, protect renters, and ease cost burdens.
The American Rescue Plan kept people housed during the
worst of the pandemic recession and laid the foundation for
jumpstarting new construction. Over $14 billion of the Rescue
Plan state and local fiscal recovery funds have already gone
towards expanding housing supply, investing in homeless
services, and providing 3.7 million additional households with
rent, mortgage, and utility relief.
Under President Biden's Housing Supply Action Plan, more
new apartments were under construction in 2023 than in any year
on record. Our appropriations support housing programs like the
Home Investment Partnerships, community development block
grants, and housing choice vouchers, but it obviously isn't
enough.
Over these next few months, I'll be introducing bills to
assist home ownership and access to affordable rentals for
lower income Americans. Next month, with Congressman Panetta
and Blumenauer, I'll propose a $15,000 first-time homebuyers
tax credit for lower income Americans, refundable, advanceable,
and available for homeowners at the time of purchase.
My Democratic Budget colleagues have also come to the table
with detailed proposals to expand housing affordability. This
includes Senator Wyden's Decent, Affordable, Safe Housing for
All (DASH) Act, the Low-Income First-Time Homebuyers (LIFT) Act
of 2021, lead by my colleagues Senators Warner, Van Hollen, and
Kaine. The Fair Housing Improvement Act lead by Senators Kaine
and Sanders, Senator Merkley's End Hedge Fund Control of
American Homes Act, the Delivering Essential Protection,
Opportunity, and Security for Tenants (DEPOSIT) Act lead by
Senators Lujan and Padilla, and Senator Padilla's Housing for
All Act. We'll hear about many of those programs and proposals
today.
Ensuring access to safe and affordable housing is a moral
and economic imperative. I hope it is something upon which we
can find common ground and advance this year. Senator Johnson.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR GRASSLEY \2\ \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Prepared statement of Senator Grassley appears in the appendix
on page 32.
\3\ Senator Grassley's opening statement was read by Senator
Johnson.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Senator Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I obviously want
to express my sentiment for a full and speedy recovery to
Senator Grassley, but also for you. I see you're in quite a bit
of back pain. I hope you recover quickly. And I'm happy to read
Senator Grassley's opening statement.
``Mr. Chairman, I appreciate your calling today's hearing
on housing affordability. In Senator Grassley's 99 county
meetings, he regularly hears from Iowans about the lack of
housing, especially to pricing afford.'' I hear the same thing
in Wisconsin and I'm sure every senator hears that back in
their states as well.
``While affordable housing is in short supply in many
communities, this isn't due to a shortage of federal housing
programs. Currently, there are more than 100 housing programs
at the federal level, costing more than $100 billion per year.
This includes over $70 billion in the Department of Housing and
Urban Development budget alone. Billions more are provided in
programs outside of HUD, including through United States
Department of Agriculture (USDA), the Department of Defense,
and the Department of Veterans Affairs.
``On top of these programs, the tax code includes
incentives for homeownership and the construction of low-income
housing. There are also government loan guarantees and
government-sponsored enterprises to support the housing credit
market. Despite this litany of programs, affordable housing
concerns remain a perennial issue. In recent years, inflation,
driving by reckless federal spending under the Biden
Administration has made problems worse.
``In 2021, the price of homes increased by the largest
amount in the history of the Case-Shiller National Home Price
Index at 19.3 percent and home prices are up over 32 percent
since Biden took office. Well, good for homeowners, except for
increased property taxes, renters felt the pain with rental
prices increasing to the third largest amount over the last 100
years in 2022. Rents are now over 19 percent higher than when
Biden took office.
``Before spending billions more on additional federal
housing programs, we should take a good, hard look at why
existing programs have fallen short. For decades, Senator
Grassley's conducted oversight over HUD and local housing
agencies, exposing widespread waste, fraud, and abuse. Too
often, the government overpays for poorly executed projects,
and a maze of housing programs creates inefficiencies and a
lack of accountability.
``Senator Grassley has found HUD does very little, if any,
oversight of the housing authorities, so they get away with
lavish office spending on salaries, vehicles, parties, and
travel. All this while poor people are waiting in line,
sometimes for years, for actual housing. Of today's witnesses,
Bill Slover, knows this all too well from his time exposing
waste, fraud, and abuse in our housing programs right here in
D.C.
``While we work to reform and improve our housing programs,
the last thing American homebuyers need right now is more
budget housing spending given our dire fiscal situation. As a
nonpartisan congressional budget office recognizes, higher debt
tends to increase borrowing costs in both the public and
private sectors by driving up interest rates. Our current
decades-high interest rates aren't only causing taxpayers to
pay record amounts of interest on the national debt, but also
making it harder to afford their mortgage.
``This past fall 30-year mortgage rates peaked at nearly 8
percent, a 20-year high. Left unchecked, our rapidly rising
national debt will continue to place upward pressure on
interest rates, making the American dream of homeownership less
attainable. Senator Grassley understands the desire to do more
to help working families obtain affordable housing, but that
won't be achieved simply by throwing money at the problem. In
fact, it only makes things worse.
``We need to start by rooting out the enormous amount of
waste, fraud, and abuse.'' We both welcome all of today's
witnesses. And I'll only add, the numbers are quite shocking.
In January 2021, the 30-year fixed mortgage rate average was
2.65 percent. That's more than two and a half times over that
now at 6.7 percent. I think the real shocking number is in
Quarter 1, 2020. The average monthly payment for a new home was
$1,787. Now, it's 1.86 times higher than that at $3,322 per
month, just under $40,000 a year.
Those are shocking numbers, again, caused by massive
government spending, which has turned a dollar that people held
at the start of the Biden Administration into 85 cents. And
from my standpoint, that's one of the primary root causes of a
very significant problem, particularly for young people. So
again, I appreciate the hearing, look forward to hearing more
about what the root causes are. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Whitehouse. Thanks, Senator Johnson. I'll
introduce the witnesses now. Our first is Ms. Peggy Bailey.
She's the Vice President for Housing and Income Security at the
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities and also served in the
Biden-Harris Administration as senior advisor on rental
assistance to HUD Secretary Marcia Fudge. Welcome, Ms. Bailey.
Our second witness is Mrs. Carol Ventura of our own Rhode
Island Housing. She's the Executive Director. She has over 30
years of experience in expanding access to housing, building
livable communities, and leading economic efforts. She has
dedicated her career to helping Rhode Islanders access housing
opportunities and she leads a terrific organization that is
very effective, and I actually served on its Board for a while
as the Director of Business Regulations, so it's wonderful,
Carol, to see you here in Washington. Thank you so much for
sharing your time and expertise with us.
Our next witness will be introduced by our esteemed
colleague from the great state of Ohio, who's visiting the
Budget Committee today for purposes of making this
introduction. Senator Brown.
STATEMENT OF SENATOR BROWN
Senator Brown. Mr. Chairman, thank you. Ranking Member
Johnson, thank you. A tremendous panel you've convened today.
I'd like to quickly recognize Ms. Peggy Bailey for her work on
my Banking, Housing, Urban Affairs Committee from the Center of
Budget and Policy Priorities. She shared her expertise with our
Committee many times. Good to see you, Ms. Bailey, but I'm
going to introduce one member. I promise.
I'm honored to welcome a long-time friend I've known for 20
years, him and is family, have so many of our friends in
common, Franklin County Board of Commissioners, Board of
Commissioners' President. We have three commissioners in each
county. He's the President of the County Commissioners in
Columbus, Kevin Boyce. Welcome to the Senate Budget Committee,
Mr. Boyce.
He's been a leader in Ohio for more than two decades. He
was a member of the Columbus City Council. He's been State
Treasurer. He's been a member of the legislature and now is
County Commissioner in Ohio's largest and fastest growing
county. Commissioner Boyce deals every day with the housing
challenges this Committee will discuss today. Central Ohio, as
I said, is the fastest growing region of the state, by far,
thriving business, growing investment, more and more families
are making Central Ohio, especially Franklin County, home
because of the work we've done to bring crucial industries like
semiconductor manufacturing to Ohio.
There's tremendous opportunity. That's the good news. The
demand for affordable housing will only increase, as will
transportation challenges. Columbus residents, whose family
ties to the city go back generations, are now all too often
being displaced from neighborhoods that they've called home for
decades. Commissioner Boyce was on the frontline of these
challenges as a member of the Board of Franklin County Land
Bank, the Mid-Ohio Regional Planning Commission, the County
Planning Commission, he's seen the challenges. He's also
helping to craft the solutions and the Committee will gain from
that today.
He brought his expertise to the National Association of
Counties. He was co-chair of the Housing Taskforce last summer.
Under Commissioner Boyce's leadership, the taskforce released a
report to help communities across the country to tackle housing
challenges. He also, last year, in a very busy schedule, he
also helped establish Adelphi Bank, Ohio's first Black-owned
bank, to advance economic opportunity. I cannot overestimate
how important that venture is, how significant that effort is.
He serves as a member of Adelphi's Board, along with
friends whom I've also known for 15, 20, 25 years, former
Columbus Mayor Coleman, Karen Morrison, and Alex Shumate, Larry
James, helping to support homeownership at some of the most
challenging times, helping to support entrepreneurship and
investment, particularly in Ohio's Black community and
Columbus's Black community. It's about creating opportunity for
people who've been denied for too long to buy homes, to start
businesses, build wealth, and have been victimized by predatory
housing investors.
Commissioner Boyce, thanks for appearing today to share
your expertise. Thank you, to the Committee, for giving me the
opportunity to, Mr. Chair, to introduce Mr. Boyce. Thank you.
Chairman Whitehouse. Thank you, Senator Brown. Following
Mr. Boyce, we will hear from Mr. Bill Slover, who is Principal
at AVCO Interests and a former chair and commissioner of the
D.C. Housing Authority Board. Welcome, Mr. Slover.
Our final witness today will be Dr. Todd Walker. Dr. Walker
is the Walter Professor, Professor of Financial Economics and
Director of the Center for Applied Economics and Policy
Research at Indiana University. He's also a research professor
at the Deutsche Bundesbank Bank, the German Central Bank. We
welcome his testimony. And if I may turn first to Ms. Bailey,
you may proceed with your statement. Your complete testimony
will be made a part of the record, and we look forward to your
five-minute testimony orally.
STATEMENT OF PEGGY BAILEY, VICE PRESIDENT OF HOUSING AND INCOME
SECURITY, CENTER ON BUDGET AND POLICY PRIORITIES \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Prepared statement of Ms. Bailey appears in the appendix on
page 34.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ms. Bailey. Thank you, Chairman Whitehouse and Senator
Johnson, and members of the Committee. I really appreciate the
opportunity to testify before you this morning. We're currently
facing a housing affordability crisis and it is most acute for
people with the lowest incomes who are more likely to be
renters.
Over the 20 plus years of my career in housing policy,
rarely does a week go by where I don't receive at least one
call or an email from someone desperate for housing assistance
without any idea of where to get help. Every time I reply I
can't shake the worry and concern I have knowing that getting
assistance is like hitting the lottery.
Solving this problem rooted in the longstanding and
persistent gap between average renters' income and the cost of
rent requires congressional action in four key areas: expanding
rental assistance, increasing supply of new units, preserving
existing affordable housing, and strengthening fair housing and
tenant rights protections.
In order to solve a problem, the reasons behind the problem
have to be properly diagnosed. As a nation, we have spent too
long blaming and punishing people for being poor, for not
having a home, for being evicted, or for struggling to pay
their bills. The primary reason people struggle to pay their
rent is that there is a gap between 30 percent of their
income--the general standard for determining housing
affordability--and their rent costs.
Imagine the grocery store worker you depended on so much
during the pandemic. This worker might be a single parent with
two kids. If they make $15 an hour, their salary is about
$31,000 a year if they work full time. Thirty percent of that
income a month is $775. Even if the kids share a room, please
tell me where that parent can rent a two-bedroom apartment for
$775 a month. With the average monthly rent for a two-bedroom
apartment in 2022 being $1300, the answer is likely nowhere.
As Chairman Whitehouse mentioned, recent estimates from the
Joint Center for Housing Studies at Harvard, show that about 22
million renters pay more than 30 percent of their income on
rent and about 12 million of these people pay 50 percent or
more, an all-time high. And this is not a new phenomenon. This
chart shows that the gap between rents and incomes is
persistent. And even when incomes go up overall, they don't
completely catch up with rent costs.
Workers with low wages, seniors, people with disabilities,
people living outside, and many other people aren't paid
enough, through no fault of their own, to afford rent. They
urgently need financial assistance to afford a place to live.
Housing is not a ``nice to have'' for any of us. It is a basic
human need. Housing assistance prevents people from
unnecessarily dying on the street. It helps children do better
in school, it prevents evictions that make it even harder for
people to find housing, and it helps ensure families don't have
to choose between paying the rent or paying for other basic
needs like medicine, clothing, and food.
It's also an economic issue. People can't work in
communities where they can't afford housing. Increasing access
to affordable housing helps employers attract employees and
creates more jobs, thus stimulating the economy. We need a
comprehensive strategy to make rental housing affordable for
all.
First, Congress needs to fully fund rental assistance to
meet the need. In the short term, Congress should fund voucher
renewals in 2024. In the long-term, rental assistance should be
expanded to reach all families who need it, prioritizing the
people with the lowest incomes. And Congress should utilize the
mandatory side of the budget for rental assistance expansion to
ensure funding adjusts as costs and needs rise.
Next, we need to invest in revitalizing public housing and
other aging, affordable housing developments. Existing
affordable housing must be preserved, or we'll never keep up
with the supply need. Also, we must increase and streamline
funding for affordable housing supply, both rental housing and
single-family developments. Affordable rental housing is often
expensive to build and then is often more expensive to build
than market-rate housing due to complicated financing and other
regulations and rules. And affordable single-family housing is
needed because it can help ease cost pressures in the rental
market and help families attain an important step towards
stabilizing their financial futures. Some of these are state
and local issues, but program alignment at the federal level is
critical.
Finally, federal, state, and local governments should
increase investment in fair housing solutions and tenant
protections that contain rent costs, ensure housing quality,
and allow tenants to live in neighborhoods of their choice that
work for them and their families. Thank you again for the
opportunity to testify and I look forward to answering your
questions.
Chairman Whitehouse. Thank you very much. Mrs. Ventura.
STATEMENT OF CAROL VENTURA, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, RI HOUSING \5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Prepared statement of Mrs. Ventura appears in the appendix on
page 46.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mrs. Ventura. Mr. Chairman, Senator Johnson, and members of
the Committee, thank you for this opportunity to testify on the
serious housing affordability challenges facing our country.
I'm Carol Ventura, the Executive Director of Rhode Island
Housing, the housing finance agency for the State of Rhode
Island. We provide financing and counseling to help low- and
moderate-income households buy and keep a home, provide rental
assistance to low-income renters, finance the development and
preservation of affordable housing, and service our single and
multi-family mortgage portfolios.
Like many states, Rhode Island is facing a critical housing
shortage, which has contributed to significant increases in
housing prices. The state is simply not producing enough
housing to meet the needs of its residents. Over the past
decade, Rhode Island's rate of housing permitting has ranked
last in the nation, and as housing production has slowed,
vacancy rates have decreased. Not surprisingly, as vacancy
rates have decreased, housing costs have increased
significantly. Over the past five years, the median price of a
single-family home has increased 49 percent, and the average
rent has increased 23 percent. Across Rhode Island, around
150,000 households, one third of our population, are housing
cost burdened.
Federal investments made through the American Rescue Plan
Act played an important role helping Rhode Island recover from
the effects of the pandemic. The state has invested $321.5
million in state and local fiscal recovery funds to support
housing and homeless programs. Rhode Island Housing is
administering just over $206 million of these resources, $30
million has provided first-time homebuyers with downpayment
assistance, and $175 million is financing the development and
preservation of affordable housing.
To date, over $100 million has been committed to financing
more than 1,400 affordable homes and another $32 million is
supporting site acquisition and pre-development activities for
62 proposed affordable housing developments. These new
development resources have been particularly impactful because
they've allowed us to better leverage other important
development resources like the Federal Low Income Housing Tax
Credit, particularly, the 4 percent housing credit.
The historic investments that Congress has made in housing
and homeless programs have been vital, but much more needs to
be done. There are several steps that the federal government
could take to address housing affordability challenges. First,
increase appropriations for housing production and rental
assistance programs. Affordable housing development programs
like HOME Investment Partnerships Program (HOME), the National
Housing Trust, and the Capital Magnet Fund are critically
important.
Inflation, supply chain issues, and increasing land costs
have all contributed to significant increases in the cost of
housing development. That means we need significantly more
subsidies through these programs to produce the same number of
units. The cost of renting and operating housing has also risen
significantly. To mitigate these increases, more investment is
needed in rental assistance programs.
Second, pass the Affordable Housing Credit Improvement Act
(AHCIA). One of the most important steps Congress can take to
increase the supply of affordable housing is to pass the Act.
This bill would significantly increase the allocation of 9
percent housing credits building upon the success of this
powerful financing tool. The Act also reduces the amount of
tax-exempt bond financing required to access 4 percent housing
credits and making other important improvements to the program.
The AHCIA will significantly increase affordable housing
production and we urge you to pass it.
I know Congress is currently considering a tax package that
includes several important elements of the Act. Rhode Island
Housing strongly supports these provisions and urges Congress
to act quickly to adopt this important package. Finally,
permanently extend the Federal Financing Bank, HUD Risk Sharing
Initiative. HUD's risk sharing program provides mortgage
insurance for affordable housing developments financed by
housing finance agencies.
In 2014, a new tool was made available that combined HUD's
Risk Sharing Mortgage Insurance with low-cost financing
provided through Treasury's Federal Financing Bank. This
program has been a very effective tool in Rhode Island and in
many other states, and we urge Congress to make the program
permanent.
Thank you again for dedicating this hearing to the
important housing affordability challenges facing our country.
I'm honored to have had this opportunity to testify before the
Committee and to share Rhode Island Housing's experiences.
Chairman Whitehouse. Thank you, Mrs. Ventura. We're
delighted to have you here. Mr. Boyce.
STATEMENT OF KEVIN BOYCE, COMMISSIONER, FRANKLIN COUNTY BOARD
OF COMMISSIONERS \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Prepared statement of Mr. Boyce appears in the appendix on page
52.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Boyce. Chairman Whitehouse, Ranking Member Grassley,
Senator Johnson, and certainly, Senator Brown, thank you for
the warm introduction, as well as distinguished members of the
Committee. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today on
the state of our nation's housing crisis, the approach counties
are taking to address it, and the critical role that our
intergovernmental partnership plays in crafting comprehensive
solutions.
My name is Kevin Boyce and I currently serve as the
President of the County Board of Commissioners in Franklin
County, Ohio. Additionally, over the last year, I've had the
honor of serving as co-chair of the National Association of
Counties, NACo, Taskforce on affordable housing.
Franklin County is Ohio's largest county with over 1.3
million residents and one of the fastest growing in the region.
Our county seat, Columbus, is the state capital and America's
14th largest city. This size makes our region a major economic
engine, not only for the state, but for our nation. Currently,
we are home to many national institutions, including the Ohio
State University, five Fortune 500 companies, and nearly 20
Fortune 1000 companies. This growth does not come without its
growing pains, though, which is why I'm honored to join you
here today.
Housing constraints within our county and the region have
increasingly become a focal point of local policymakers,
perspective employers, and community members alike. In addition
to sharing my personal story on the vital role that stable
housing placed in my life, I'll be touching on recommendations
from NACo on how the federal government can further help and
support counties local efforts to increase housing
accessibility and affordability.
Many colliding factors contribute to the current housing
affordability crisis. Housing costs have been rising steadily,
largely outpacing wages, which has placed an increased
financial burden on renters and homeowners alike. In 2021,
roughly half of the renters and one in three homeowners were
cost burdened. The median price of homes increased by more than
$107,000 in Quarter 1 2020 to Quarter 1 2023, while rents have
increased by 16 percent in the same timeframe.
Not only are Americans facing higher housing costs, but the
stock available for renting and owning is increasingly limited.
Nearly 80 percent of homeowners who currently have a mortgage
hold an interest rate below 5 percent, keeping housing
inventory at record lows. These statistics lend context to a
problem counties know all to well. Housing affordability is
increasing out of reach for our residents.
In Franklin County, four of every ten renters are cost
burdened, spending more than 30 percent of their annual income
on housing. Since 2010, the population within the county has
grown 14 percent while total housing units in the county have
increased only 10 percent, further widening the gap.
My story is similar to many American families that are
stuck in cycles of poverty. In the course of my K through 12
years of primary and secondary education, I attended 11
different schools. Statistics would suggest a pathway of
outcomes that reflect a trajectory of instability, educational
deficiencies, and even potentially incarceration, but I was
fortunate to learn two very important lessons. First, the best
social service is a good paying job. And secondly, housing is
fundamental to stability.
I sit here today as the former Treasurer of the State of
Ohio, current president of Ohio's largest county, and the
founder of Adelphi Bank, but I'm most proud of is seeing the
cycle of poverty broken in my own family where my oldest son is
a double Ivy League grad. Brown University, I might add, Mr.
Chairman. And my youngest is a senior at a top institution in
Los Angeles. My story is one of countless stories that the
American people can tell about housing, how it's changed their
lives and changed the lives of future generations.
By 2050, the region is expected to grow by more than a
million residents with an estimated regional population
increasing to 3.15 million. Of that, Franklin County is
expected to absorb at least half of the regional growth. With a
team of more than 30 of my colleagues from across the country,
NACo's Housing Taskforce worked to find county-led solutions to
address our nation's growing housing crisis, understanding that
counties have governance limitations, we looked towards our
partnership with our federal government colleagues to enhance
the current and future housing programs and ensure that we have
the required tools to reduce the cost burden facing our
homeowners and residents.
In collaboration with NACo, I offer the following
recommendations: (1) invest additional federal resources to
adequately support housing needs, (2) modernize and strengthen
current federal programs, (3) provide more direct and local
government funding opportunities, and (4) simplify programs and
reduce burdensome compliance requirements on local governments.
In conclusion, Carol mentioned many of the programs that we
support as counties need more of, quite frankly, but I'd be
remiss if I didn't recognize the bipartisan nature working with
Senator Brown and Vance, Congresswoman Beatty and Kerry, and
even my wife, Congresswoman Sykes, to ensure that our
partnership impacts the lives of the residents that we all
serve.
Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, thank you so
much for having me today and I look forward to your questions.
Chairman Whitehouse. Thank you so much, Mr. Boyce. We'll
next hear from Mr. Slover.
STATEMENT OF BILL SLOVER, PRINCIPAL, AVCO INTERESTS, LLC \7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Prepared statement of Mr. Slover appears in the appendix on
page 66.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Slover. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Whitehouse,
Ranking Member Grassley and Senator Johnson, and members of the
Committee. I appreciate the opportunity to discuss the critical
issue of housing affordability. My name is Bill Slover and I
have over 30 years of experience in both public and private
sector real estate. My testimony centers on my near 10 years on
the D.C. Housing Authority Board (DCHA) emphasizing the
challenges faced, the impact of poorly functioning agencies on
housing affordability, and recommendations for reform.
DCHA plays a critical role, housing over 18,000 low-income
families with an annual budget of over $500 million. When I was
first appointed as chairman by the mayor in 2009, my goal was
to enhance affordability and housing quality. Immediately
recognizing the need for fundamental change, I pushed for
greater accountability, improved financial management. My
efforts faced resistance, resulting in my swift removal as
chair. My term ended without tangible progress.
Rejoining the Board in 2015 as the advocate representative,
I again pushed for efficiencies, reform, and better financial
stewardship. Despite exhaustive efforts, the agency's decline
persisted. By the fall of 2021, the situation necessitated
reaching out to HUD, resulting in a scathing review published
in September of 2022. The HUD report highlighted DCHA's
systematic failures through 80 plus findings, including
potential violations of conflict of interests from multimillion
dollar contracts and suspected overspending in the $300 million
plus voucher program, just to name two.
The HUD report identified five principal issues
contributing to DCHA's failure, including inadequate oversight,
poor management, lack of expertise, and a failure to provide
decent, safe housing. The report emphasized the need for
immediate remedial action. Rather than addressing the HUD
findings collaboratively, the mayor and the D.C. City Council
disbanded the independent board, replacing with mayoral
appointees and awarded the existing executive director a
$40,000 bonus. This drastic response removed all independent
voices from the Board.
A year after these changes, there is little evidence of
meaningful reform at DCHA. Recent news in the Washington Post
highlights continued struggles in the voucher program, the
city's largest program. The need for decisive intervention
remains. Despite my experience at DCHA, I'm a strong believer
that Public Housing Authorities (PHA) play a critical role in
solving the housing affordability crisis. They are tasked with
housing, as many of our most vulnerable populations possible
with the resources they have.
It's simple math. If the agency is inefficient and spends
more money on basic operations, fewer people get housed,
causing a negative ripple effect across the entire housing
space. HUD needs to completely rethink its oversight of PHAs as
the current process is failing far too often. Absent this, no
amount of money pumped into PHAs will result in sustainable
progress towards increased access to housing. Money will not
solve what is a failure of execution compounded by a lack of
oversight and accountability.
HUD should do these three things before providing any
additional funding to PHAs: enhanced oversight. HUD must revamp
its oversight of PHAs, setting clear, key performance indexes
to track, report, and achieve results, and intervene as soon as
an agency gets off track. Change governance structure. PHA
governing bodies need to be held directly accountable to HUD
rather than local and municipal leaders.
As Senator Grassley has pointed out repeatedly, PHAs rely
too heavily on local officials to be good stewards of billions
of taxpayer dollars, which is no way to exercise fiduciary
responsibility. Demand qualified leaders. Until PHAs can
execute the basic functions of managing properties, setting
rental rates, and overseeing waiting lists, they will continue
to underperform. PHAs are operating businesses and need to be
run as such.
I hope my experience can inform this Committee as it
considers how to best allocate taxpayer dollars towards our
nation's housing challenge. We need to better understand why
costs are so high and production is so low and begin to make
the necessary market corrections needed to increase the
efficiencies of the space.
Thank you again and I look forward to answering any of your
questions.
Chairman Whitehouse. Thank you, Mr. Slover. Dr. Walker is
next.
STATEMENT OF DR. TODD WALKER, WALTER PROFESSOR OF FINANCIAL
ECONOMICS, INDIANA UNIVERSITY \8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Prepared statement of Dr. Walker appears in the appendix on
page 143.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dr. Walker. Chairman Whitehouse, Ranking Member Johnson,
Committee members, thank you for the opportunity to speak with
you today on such an important topic. It is an honor to be
here.
With the recent increase in mortgage rates, housing has
become substantially less affordable today than just a few
years ago. Let's compare two families. Family One purchases the
median priced home with a 20 percent downpayment at the 30-year
fixed rate mortgage available in January of 2021. Family Two
purchases the same home at today's mortgage rates. Family Two
will pay an additional $800 per month and an additional
$285,000 in interest payments over the life of the loan.
For a family making the median income, the additional
mortgage payments of $800 per month constitute 20 percent of
disposable income. This prohibitive increase in the cost to
purchase a home comes at a time when the price of all goods and
services are increasing dramatically. The good news is the rate
of inflation has been coming down. The bad news is that changes
in the price level since 2020 have made essentials like
groceries 25 percent more expensive.
Inflation is a tax on everyone, and families are still
feeling the pinch. Housing costs are, by far, the largest items
in a family's budget. If housing becomes more affordable, this
makes food, education, childcare, transportation, and all other
necessities more affordable as well. What does this analogy
have to do with the budget of the United States Government. The
only difference between these two families is the mortgage
interest rate they pay. This interest rate is tightly connected
to the interest paid on the 10-year U.S. treasury bond.
Since 1990, these two-time series have moved in lockstep
with a near perfect correlation of 0.98. As the common phrase
reminds us, correlation is not causation, but in this case the
economics are clear. Causality runs from the 10-year yield to
mortgage interest rates and not the other way around. If the
interest on the 10-year treasury increases, mortgage rates will
increase. If the 10-year yield falls, mortgage rates will fall.
So, what determines the interest rate on a 10-year U.S.
treasury? This question is much more difficult to answer.
However, the long-run foundational anchor of U.S. sovereign
debt must be fiscal policy. There are three important
considerations for the Committee. First, in response to the
financial crisis of 2008 and the COVID-19 pandemic, the Federal
Reserve engaged in a policy called quantitative easing that
opposed the 10-year yield below market-based equilibrium. This
diminished the sensitivity of long data maturities to fiscal
policy over the last 15 years. These policies are currently
being undone. As quantitative easing gives way to quantitative
tightening, fiscal policy will once again take center stage in
price discovery for the treasury market.
Second, paying interest to bond holders for debt service is
now the third largest expense of the federal government, only
behind Social Security and Medicare. Debt service will soon
exceed one trillion dollars per year, if it hasn't already. The
CDO projects debt service to grow to 3.6 percent of GDP over
the next decade, an all-time high. Bond traders recently burned
by unanticipated inflation to the tune of a record-breaking 46
percent decline in bond prices are now much more leery of
inflation-inducing fiscal expansions.
When inflation is anticipated, higher rates of interest are
required to compensate for the lost purchasing power. As debt
service grows, it will crowd out other spending needs. Finally,
increases in government spending to support the economy during
the pandemic were on par with increases to finance World Wars I
and II. Following the great Wars, through a reduction in
spending and increases in tax revenue, debt Gross Domestic
Product (GDP) ratios gradually, yet substantially declined.
This is consistent with optimal economic policy. Shocks
like wars and COVID should be smoothed over time. However, no
such fiscal consolidation is currently on the horizon. Sizable
deficits are projected for the foreseeable future. This will
certainly put upward pressure on the 10-year treasury yield,
making housing less affordable. When it comes to housing
affordability, there aren't many things more important than
mortgage rates, given that mortgage rates track the value of
U.S. debt very closely, fiscal policies initiated by this
Committee have a direct impact upon housing costs.
While other countries have struggled to reopen following
the pandemic, the strength of the U.S. economy has been on full
display. This economic growth can and should be used to
coordinate a well thought out and gradual fiscal consolidation
consistent with optimal economic theory. Such a consolidation
will make housing more affordable. I look forward to your
questions. Thank you.
Chairman Whitehouse. Thank you very much, Dr. Walker. Let
me first ask Mr. Slover a question for the record, which means
you can answer in writing and give a chance to sharpen your
pencil and put your head to it. You've given general
recommendations to make sure that Public Housing Authorities
avoid the problem of the D.C. Authority. If you'd be good
enough to submit for the record more detailed proposals, you
have a lot of members here who've proposed legislation. None of
us support fraud or abuse and to the extent we can get helpful
proposals to consider in legislation, consider this your
opportunity to do that. Would you be willing to do that?
Mr. Slover. I'd be very happy to, and I appreciate the
opportunity. Thank you.
Chairman Whitehouse. Great. Thank you. And Mrs. Ventura,
you heard Mr. Slover about his unfortunate experience with the
District of Columbia Authority. Are we seeing some more
problems around Rhode Island in your dealings with other
housing organizations in other states? How endemic do you think
the problems are that he has spoken of in the District of
Columbia?
Mrs. Ventura. We are not experiencing a similar situation
in Rhode Island. We have extremely competent housing
authorities that are doing solid work on the ground, serving
the people of Rhode Island, providing excellent housing
opportunities, and frankly, services. Services are very key to
helping people transition from public housing, the voucher
program, into solid working environment, home ownership
opportunities, so no, we are not experiencing this, Senator.
Chairman Whitehouse. And given the number of parties that
it takes to pull together a Housing deal, when we go to the
ribbon cuttings there're usually five to ten different
parties--private banks, consultants, different government
funders. There are a lot of eyeballs on these deals before they
come to fruition. Correct?
Mrs. Ventura. Yes, that's correct.
Chairman Whitehouse. So, tell me a little bit about your
experience with first-time homebuyers. The average age for a
homebuyer climbing from 29 to 36 is a statistic. It's a pretty
grim fact for young families. How do you see that playing out
and do we need to repair that?
Mrs. Ventura. Yes. Thank you for that question, Chairman.
As housing prices have increased, and they certainly have
increased, along with mortgage interest rates. We're seeing
significant increases in the average income of a buyer in Rhode
Island, and in the size of their mortgages. The average income
for a homebuyer in Rhode Island in 2023 was $92,000 and that's
up around 44 percent.
Chairman Whitehouse. You have to be making around $92,000
to be affording a home.
Mrs. Ventura. Yes. Over that same timeframe, our average
loan amount increased to $344,000, so that's an increase of 55
percent compared with 2019, so there are certainly challenges
in the market. One of the barriers that we see to achieving
homeownership is the downpayment and that's why the $30 million
that our governor set aside for downpayment assistance was
extremely helpful. We provided a $17,500 grant to first-time
homebuyers and we were able to assist over 1500 first-time
homebuyers purchase their homes, so it was an important tool.
Unfortunately, those resources are fully reserved, and we don't
have any additional funding available. We'll continue to
provide our resource, which is a $10,000 deferred loan, but
it's challenging to find homes that are affordable. You know
that, Chairman.
Chairman Whitehouse. Thank you. Ms. Bailey, make the policy
case between housing affordability and economic growth.
Ms. Bailey. Thank you, Chairman. The connection between
housing affordability and economic growth is inseparable.
Having affordable housing helps people be able to access work.
Also, building more affordable housing creates jobs for the
people that are building it and for the people that will have
to operate it. It helps people, in general, be able to be more
stable in the community and engage in work, but engage in all
of the things that a community provides. And lastly, it helped
being able to provide rental assistance is particularly
important because we know that when people with low incomes are
given housing subsidies and other subsidies by the federal
government, it allows them to invest those resources back into
the community. They don't save that money. They spend it in
their community, which helps economic growth as well.
Chairman Whitehouse. And Mr. Boyce, you used the phrase
intergovernmental partnerships. That implies a federal role.
What is the importance of a federal role in those
intergovernmental partnerships supporting adequate housing?
Mr. Boyce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me begin with the
many programs that Carol identified from Home Funds to Choice
Voucher programs, I mean all of those are catalysts to helping
families, people like me who grew up in a tough and
impoverished environment. But moreover, it's the continued
creativity around the partnership, having access to new ideas
and new resources and thinking through some of the proposals
that allow for increased homeownership like expanding the
duration of mortgage lending or with the FHA mortgage lending
standards or home funds that allow us to expand affordable
housing.
Throughout our community in Central Ohio, there are
communities that kind of have the NIMBY syndrome, Not In My
Backyard syndrome where they cite housing standards as a
barrier to affordable housing, but those home funds in many
cases allow us to mitigate the cost of certain materials or
certain products that allows us to spread the affordable
housing in communities that otherwise might not have the
permitting or variance resources to allow for it.
Chairman Whitehouse. Thank you very much. The order now is
for Senator Johnson and then Senator Kaine. I will take
advantage of Dr. Walker being here and his commitment with
Deutsche Bundesbank to put into the record the report from the
Network for Greening the Financial System of which Deutsche
Bundesbank is a member in which the network makes the point
that we've made in this Committee before that climate-related
risks are a source of financial risks. I'm quoting the
executive summary here.
``Climate change will affect the global economy and so the
financial system that supports it, the financial risks it
presents are inconsequence systemwide,'' a phrase we've heard
repeatedly in our testimony, ``and potentially irreversible if
not addressed.'' Senator Johnson, without objection, that'll be
put in the record, and Senator Johnson, the floor is yours for
questions.
STATEMENT OF SENATOR JOHNSON
Senator Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to start
talking--tell a little story. A few years ago, I was invited
down to Milwaukee to visit and learn about a program called the
ACTS, A-C-T-S, Housing Program. It was started by a catholic
priest. And basically, this catholic priest was taking
advantage of a number of foreclosures on very-well constructed
homes in the early 1900s that had fallen into disrepair and
were under foreclosure and he was able to buy these homes for a
few thousand dollars. And then with the help of private
lenders, some Wisconsin banks, individuals that were renting,
low-income individuals renting, paying too high rent, were able
to borrow 15 to $30,000, put a sweat equity, and own a home,
and literally cut their rental payments in half or more.
And it was a great program. I toured a number of homes. The
homeowners did a great job of repairing these homes on a
shoestring, but one of the main reasons the priest invited me
down was to complain about the impact of the low-income housing
tax credit on his program. What was happening is contractors
were using that low-income housing tax credit. They were
snatching up all those homes in foreclosure, putting hundreds
of thousands of dollars into those well-constructed homes and
pretty well taking the opportunity away from lower income
individuals.
So again, that was a well-intended program, a federal
government program impacting a private sector program and
disadvantaging low-income individuals, so I just had to kind of
tell that.
My questions really have to do with a functioning market,
generally supply will meet demand, particularly when demand is
boosted by $100 billion plus of government funding. I'll start
with you, Dr. Walker, and this is a general question for
everybody. Why isn't supply meeting demand? What is causing it?
Obviously, inflation is a huge problem affecting interest
rates, causing costs, but ahead, Dr. Walker.
Dr. Walker. So, I think based upon the expert testimony, we
all agree that housing affordability is important. I hear a lot
of supply constraints, so on the supply side, if it's the
supply side and supply constraints are the problem, and some of
the policy proposals that are on the demand side, like
vouchers, would make the problem even worse. It gets back your
example of an unintended consequence, right? So, if you have a
demand side solution to a supply side constraint, then you're
going to have an increase in home prices which will make
matters worse, or you're going to displace people who don't
have access to the voucher. That's going to lead to a race to
the bottom where people are going to try to get just below the
point where they can access the voucher.
Why supply is so constrained I think there's regulatory
issues that could be addressed. Mr. Slover probably have more
information about those, but I just wanted to briefly mention,
again, based upon your example, there are untended consequences
of all these policies. And I think when you have a supply side
issue, and you address it what a demand side policy you have
unintended consequences that could be much worse.
Mr. Johnson. I'd like a little more detail on that. Again,
I just want to throw a couple of things, rent controls,
obviously keep down the supply because it's just not worth
investing in things. Obviously, high interest rates drive up
the costs, over regulation. Mr. Slover, and I apologize for
mispronouncing your name in the opening statement, but can you
enlighten us on this?
Mr. Slover. Just to sort of build on what Dr. Walker was
saying, I think one of the unintended consequences of some
government programs I think it's sort of an idea versus
execution which is a way I like to simplify things sometimes.
You know in Washington, D.C., as an example, the D.C. Housing
Authority Board approved a rent payment standard of 187 percent
of what HUD thinks fair market rent is. So now, the D.C.
Housing Authority has 12 to 15,000 rents that they're willing
to pay upwards of 187 percent of what HUD thinks is the fair
market rent.
What that does is floods the market with people--with
payments that are above what the market is and that puts
pressure on the rest of the market because now you have someone
overpaying significantly for units which pushes up prices lower
and also creates an industry where people actually go out and
purchase organically existing low-income housing and remove
those residents and backfill it with higher paying vouchers.
It's an entire business model out there were people promote a
business plan which says the arbitrage, the government-funded
subsidies is my business plan.
I'm going to buy a building at a cap rate of ``X''. I'm
going to empty it out and I'm going to fill it back in and my
cap rate is going to double because the rent doubled and that's
an unintended consequence.
Senator Johnson. I mean that's really exactly what happened
in Milwaukee, similar to that, with the low-income housing tax
credit. I guess for the majority witnesses, I only say all
you're asking for is more and more federal government spending
and I understand that. Some of it's appropriate, but when we
have this massive amount of deficit spending, which is the
cause of the inflation which drives up the interest rates,
which drives up the cost of housing, I mean, it's just a self-
perpetuating problem. It's not the solution. It's part of the
root cause. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Whitehouse. Senator Kaine, the sponsor of the LIFT
Act and the Fair Housing Improvement Act.
STATEMENT OF SENATOR KAINE
Senator Kaine. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thanks to the
witnesses. This is a very important topic. Since we are in a
discussion about macroeconomic trends, I do think it's
important to mention the set of articles that have just come
out in the last few days, exemplified by one in the Washington
Post of January 28th from David Lynch that I'd like to add to
the record, ``Falling inflation, rising growth give the U.S.
the world's best recovery.'' There are economic challenges, but
one of the ways to look at these challenges is to look at how
other nations, Europe, Canada, Mexico, Japan, China have dealt
with COVID and post-COVID and the assessment is that the U.S.
has done the best job in coming out of COVID, and not that
every economic issue is solved, but in terms of inflation going
down and the recovery dramatically stronger than what was
predicted, dramatically stronger than other nations, there's a
lot to be said for the policy actions that have been taken by
Congress in order to help the U.S. have this strong economic
recovery.
Now, on housing, I was a fair housing lawyer for 18 years
before I got into state politics and so this is a topic that's
very, very close. I was also a local elected official and a
governor dealing with the Low Income Housing Tax Credit
(LIHTC), dealing with HOME funding, and knowing how important
it is. During my time, now nearly 30 years on July 1, in
elected office from the local, state, and federal levels, I go
around the state and talk to a lot of people. And I will say
the cost of housing usually would be in the Top 10 over much of
my career and in the Top 3 in Northern Virginia, but now it's
Top 5 everywhere in Virginia.
I could go to the most rural parts of my Commonwealth or
Northern Virginia, it's going to be Top 5 or a Top 3 issue, so
this is a significant one and I would say particularly for
first-time homebuyers--the Chairman put some stats in about
that, that I think are important, the percentage of purchases
that are first-time homebuyers has been going down and so we
need to figure it out.
One of the things I'm real concerned about are obstacles
and barriers within housing that enable people, even if they
could afford housing, to find obstacles in their way and so I
want to ask about a particular bill that I've been working on,
the Fair Housing Improvement Act. The Housing Choice Voucher
Program provides rental assistance to allow families to find
rentals that work for them. There are other programs like
Section 8 vouchers. Veterans Affairs (VA) has some housing
choice vouchers. And in theory, families can use this
assistance to move to neighborhoods of their choice and get
access to schools, get access to transit, and get access to
jobs.
However, what we find is many landlords and those who have
rental properties say that they refuse to take vouchers. They
refuse to take government income as a source of income, and
they use that as a reason to turn people down. We don't accept
Section 8 vouchers. We don't accept Housing vouchers. We don't
accept some of the VA vouchers. I think there's a significant
body of evidence that suggests that that's pretextual. The
notion of we don't take vouchers. You'll take somebody's
paystub when they could be sacked tomorrow as evidence of their
ability to pay. Somebody having a voucher--a voucher is a much
more likely long-term reliable source of income than anybody's
paystub would be.
What we've seen around the country, including in Virginia,
is commonwealths and states adding to the Fair Housing laws and
prohibiting discrimination on the grounds of source of income.
I introduced a bill first with Senator Orin Hatch to do this.
Utah was one of the early states in the country that prohibited
discrimination on the source of income, and we haven't yet been
able to get that passed. I have helped and encouraged Virginia
to pass it at the commonwealth level and I think it's working.
But I have a bill at the federal level, and I guess I'd
like to ask Ms. Bailey how would you see something like the
Fair Housing Improvement Act making it easier for people to
afford housing when they have a source of income that would
enable them to pay the rent?
Ms. Bailey. Thanks Senator and thanks for the work on this
really important issue because we also know that source of
income discrimination can also be a proxy for racial
discrimination and discrimination for people with disabilities
because we know the voucher program serves all people and
particularly people with disabilities and people of color. So,
this is critically important, and it can make a difference.
Having a law is important, also putting the resources
behind enforcement of the law is a critical component of any
source of income antidiscrimination measures because we have to
make sure that landlords know that there will be action taken
if they discriminate against voucher holders because we just
need everyone to be able to have a safe place to call home.
Senator Kaine. Great. Thank you. The last thing I'll say
and then hand it back, Mr. Chair, is that I'm a big fan of the
LIHTC Program. Just watching how--the Virginia Housing used to
be the Virginia Housing Development Authority--uses those
federal dollars to incentivize the construction of low- and
moderate-income rental property and putting requirements in
that means significant percentages of those receiving the LIHTC
funding have to be accessible units for seniors, for folks with
disabilities.
Much of the accessible housing stock in Virginia has been
produced through smart use of LIHTC, so I'm a strong believer
that you don't have to create a new program when you have one
that's working. You just need to do more of it, and I think
LIHTC is one of those. With that, thanks to the witnesses. I
hand it back.
Chairman Whitehouse. And thank you to Senator Kaine for his
extremely knowledgeable leadership in this area. Senator
Padilla.
STATEMENT OF SENATOR PADILLA
Senator Padilla. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Maybe not for as
many years as Senator Kaine, but I too have a diversity of
experience having started in the local government, a member of
Los Angeles City Council once upon a time, having served a
couple terms for the California legislature before coming to
the Senate, so I've seen the challenges of creating additional
housing, whether it's a need for additional affordable housing
to housing affordability crisis through multiple angles, and
so, yes, our housing crisis is primarily a crisis of supply at
this point.
Having been intimately familiar with negotiating deals and
seeing successful development and those that were great
visions, but failed to come to fruition it's because of
oftentimes the bottlenecks or the bureaucracy, and the well-
intended measures to regulate housing production have also, at
times, become a barrier to increasing the housing supply that a
growing population needs.
Typically, a developer will first secure a site before
pursuing subsidies in the forms of grants or loans from
multiple sources to amass the capital necessary before then
applying for tax credit, if that's what it takes to get a
project to pencil. Clearly, that can take a long time, often
years and years and years. This has essentially also shut out
small scale developer who lack the financial resources or
expertise to navigate government bureaucracy and has increasing
driven builders to turn to the private sector for capital to
fund permanent and affordable housing units. But most of us
agree housing is a human right and private investment alone
cannot be the solution to the housing crisis.
We must provide additional funding to improve the
efficiency of the traditional affordable housing development
process in order to increase the pace of housing production to
keep up with the need that is clearly out there. A question for
both Ms. Bailey and Mrs. Ventura. How could we streamline
federal programs so that developers can more easily navigate
and maximize available public funds?
Ms. Bailey. Thank you, Senator, for this question. First,
what I think is critically important is to think about the HUD
programs that have been put together to invest in capital
resources. Those programs were developed independent of each
other and not designed to be able to necessarily work together,
so they're critically important--and they also haven't been
reauthorized in quite some time.
So, looking at those programs collectively so that we
streamline them, make them easier to work together and do
exactly as you suggest, close those gaps because in development
time is money.
Senator Padilla. Mrs. Ventura, same question.
Mrs. Ventura. Thank you. I would certainly echo what Ms.
Bailey had to say, Senator. I think that it's like a jigsaw
puzzle when you try to put these transactions together. They
are complicated and they're difficult and very often we will
provide technical assistance to help developers get through
that process, but certainly agreeing that streamlining process
on a federal level, aligning the programs better would
certainly help expedite the process.
Senator Padilla. Thank you. I look forward to working with
both of you to pursue that, recognizing that, first of all, we
need the input from the folks who practice this, the developing
community, but also recognizing that what it takes to build in
Los Angeles can be different than what it is to build in
Bakersfield, California, which is going to be different than
Texas versus New York versus Montana, et cetera.
I want to make sure my time remaining to touch on one other
area and that's homelessness and the lack of affordable housing
are not new issues, but clearly unacceptable that more than
650,000 people--I'm taking veterans, families, young people,
seniors experience homelessness on any given night in the
United States each and every year. And even more American
experience housing insecurity. So, they may not be experiencing
homelessness yet, but one small stroke of bad luck and they may
very well find themselves in that situation, which is why I was
proud to introducing my Housing for All Act, which would
strategically surge federal investments in existing programs to
reduce housing insecurity and increase funding for innovative,
locally developed solutions.
As Senator Kaine said, if we have successful programs, we
don't need additional programs to compete with them. Let's just
amplify, let's scale up. And homelessness is not just an urban
or just a rural issue. It's not just a Red state or just a Blue
state issue. It affects all states, all counties, all
communities.
Ms. Bailey, what innovative solutions could the federal
government invest in to keep more people housed and prevent
more Americans from falling to homelessness?
Ms. Bailey. So, the pandemic actually showed us the way in
this space. With the Emergency Housing Voucher Program, HUD was
given additional flexibility to alter how the voucher program
worked and gave housing authorities additional resources to
provide the services and be able to lease up a population that
we generally consider among the hardest to serve, folks who
have been experiencing homelessness and the housing authorities
were able to do that in record time. This has been one of the
more successful programs we've had in being able to take a
resource from Congress and house folks quickly.
The other thing I would say is experimentation in how to
streamline the voucher program would be really critical and one
idea is to provide direct rental assistance to tenants. Right
now, rental assistance goes to the landlord. If we could
provide rental assistance that looks more like cash from the
landlord's perspective it could get rid of some of the source
of income discrimination and streamline the process so that
renters would be able to use the dollars more flexibly.
Senator Padilla. My time is up, but I just call my
colleagues attention to not just helping address housing
affordability in the short term, but you can appreciate the
ripple effects in terms of greater economic benefit for local
communities, for the state, and for the nation. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Senator Kaine. Next up, Senator Braun.
STATEMENT OF SENATOR BRAUN
Senator Braun. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I heard coming in
successful programs and the things try to do through the
federal government. Always commend any good idea that looks
like it's got sustainability and is actually addressing a
problem. I can tell you when I travel across my own state the
issues that come up most often would be the high cost of
healthcare, workforce, and if it's not third, it's fourth,
would be affordable housing and high-speed Internet.
So, my concern is I think you're always going to get decent
ideas, but for them to be dependable it's got to be based on a
foundation of sustainable financing. And what concerns me most,
and we're in the Budget Committee, is that we've got to pay
more attention that regardless of what topic we're talking
about. And here, of course, it's housing. So, I think my
concern, and I'd like to get some opinions on what you think
about sustainability when--I'll cite these numbers and how
confident you'd be that the business partner, the federal
government is going to be there for the good idea that might
come across a legislative bow, so to speak.
We were five trillion in debt, I think, cumulatively, up
through the Bush Administration, added another five trillion
from 2000 to 2008. To keep score, that's 10 trillion. From '08
to '16, the Obama Administration, we added another six
trillion. That's 16 trillion. Structuralized annual deficits,
meaning cumulative debt with it, at a trillion dollars a year
'17 and '18. I arrived in '18 and have been the loudest voice
on for whatever you like through the federal government,
hopefully, you'd get the operation working, prioritize, and
make the best decisions.
Well, COVID came along and kind of blew the doors off that
thought. That was kind of a once, hopefully, in a century that
we have to contend with. I think we spent a ton of money. Every
penny was borrowed basically. The next result is we're 34
trillion in debt and the only template out there has been put
out by the White House. It has us 42 trillion in debt in five
years, 52 in 10 years. I'm not going to go through the
arithmetic, but start pricing in part of the interest rate
increase, it's going to overwhelm the system.
Indiana University, we appreciate balanced budgets. We
generate one annually. We live within our means. And I want to
ask a few others the same question. Does it make sense to be
talking about more when we're burdening future generations at
the tune of a trillion dollars every six months currently that
we borrow? Mr. Walker.
Mr. Walker. So, the numbers themselves are alarming. That a
percentage of GDP that are increasing, which deficits as a
percentage of GDP are going to continue to go up. I'll defer to
my testimony, making a very tight link between Treasury
interest rates which are supported by fiscal policy and
mortgage rates, which is all about housing affordability. I
think there's a very tight link there.
So, what concerns me is we do have an amazing economic
recovery and yet we continue to spend higher and higher
fractions of GDP, which means debt GDP ratios are going to
increase, and as I said in my testimony, I think this is going
to put upward pressure on 10-year U.S. treasuries which is
going to put upward pressure on mortgage rates, which is----
Senator Braun. Which, ironically, housing is the most
sensitive part of our economy to that very phenomenon.
Mr. Walker. Absolutely. And that's going to make housing
much less affordable.
Senator Braun. Thank you. Mr. Slover.
Mr. Slover. Yes. I think as part of my testimony, I think,
and then listening to everybody on the panel as well, I just
think we have an idea versus execution problem, as I said
before. I think the inefficiencies of the execution, at least
in the places I've been in government, in the D.C. Housing
Authority, in the Chicago public schools, Detroit public
schools, I've worked in a lot of small cities. Inefficiencies
are abounding and so I think what you have to----
Senator Braun. If you took care of the inefficiencies,
could you still take on the onslaught of those heavy numbers I
just described with our current behavior?
Mr. Slover. Well, I think what I'm trying to say is you've
got--no. I think what you have to do is--before you can
continue to ask for more and more money, you have to actually
have accountability. You have to have a return on investment.
You have to understand are you being efficient with the money
that you have----
Senator Braun. That's a great point.
Mr. Slover . Prior to asking for more.
Senator Braun. Bravo. Okay, Mr. Boyce, would you want to
weigh in on that?
Mr. Boyce. Thank you, Senator. The only thing that I would
add with my background a little bit here is I'm an investment
banker by practice and license, and I was the former treasurer
of the State of Ohio, and I firmly believe--I certainly believe
what Mr. Slover was saying, but I firmly believe that analyzing
debt is more about not how much you have of debt, but your
ability to pay on it.
Senator Braun. So, you feel good about--with everything I
just mentioned that we'd have the ability to pay. I come from
the finance world, and I can tell you the biggest issue we're
going to have as a country, and it's inevitable, the numbers
never relent, will be that you couldn't extrapolate what you
said into this place working reasonably. Sooner or later that--
you can't just keep doing that, can you?
Mr. Boyce. But embedded in that is the ability to pay on
your debt. And again, what I look at----
Senator Braun. Principal as well as interest?
Mr. Boyce. Of course. Of course. Of course. Embedded in
that, though, in the debt, is the job creation and all of the
various tentacles that expand from job creation. When you talk
about LITHC and the use of those tools and what it actually
means in the bigger sense of the debt allocation is--you know,
there you're talking about creating stable housing
opportunities so that families can become self-sustained, so
that they don't have to rely upon the system. And so, somewhere
in this conversation is balance, somewhere in this conversation
is reasonable analysis of both your ability to manage your debt
and your ability to pay on your debt.
Senator Braun. Thank you.
Senator Kaine. Senator Braun, thank you very much and I now
turn to Senator Van Hollen.
STATEMENT OF SENATOR VAN HOLLEN
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank all of
you for being here today to talk about this very important
subject. And clearly, housing affordability is a huge issue
everywhere in our country. I hear about it all the time in the
State of Maryland and the lack of adequate supply is a big
piece of that and we need to look for more ways to incentivize
and encourage more supply. It's also very important, in my
view, that we continue to support the rental assistance
programs like the Housing Choice Voucher Program. I've
introduced a bipartisan bill, along with Senator Todd Young of
Indiana. It's entitled the Family Stability and Opportunity
Vouchers Act and what it does is make use of the housing choice
vouchers combined with wraparound services for families with
young children. And there's been ample research, including by
Raj Chetty that indicates that when you provide families with
that opportunity to move to areas of greater opportunity, both
the housing component as well as wraparound services, you see
significant breaks in generational poverty.
Ms. Bailey, I know that you've looked at these issues
broadly, the Housing Choice Voucher Program, the impact on
making sure that kids have a secure place to call home. Could
you comment on why it's important, both to maintain that, but
also to look at providing these wraparound services for
families with young kids?
Ms. Bailey. Yes, absolutely, Senator. And this actually
ties well to Senator Braun's question as well, right? We have
to remember that there's a cost to doing nothing as well.
There's a cost to families and to kids and to people who are
living unhoused on the street to doing nothing that oftentimes
isn't talked about. We also talk about affordable housing as
purely an issue of homelessness. It is a larger issue than
that. Many people are currently housed. If we gave them a
little bit more assistance to be able to afford where they live
today, then that also controls the affordability crisis as
well. And that stems into how the role that housing can play in
children's lives.
We know that children with stable housing do better in
school and in the long run, as Dr. Chetty's work shows, earn
more as adults and it's the wraparound services that are the
secret sauce to that. Being able to help families connect to
childcare locally, being able to help families navigate the
school system and staying with families for as long as they
need it, and as flexibly as they need services is a key
component of that.
Senator Van Hollen. Well, I appreciate that. So, Senator
Young and I pushed a number of years ago to create a pilot
program to help these families with young kids move to areas of
greater opportunities with those wraparound services and it
very quickly demonstrated what the research has shown, which
is, this is a way to help break the cycle of poverty, which is
why we proposed to expand that particular program by 250,000
vouchers over the next five years.
As we indicated, all of you have indicated in your
testimony, supply is another major factor here. In December of
last year, AXIOS estimated, based on data from the Census
Bureau and Moody's that there is a shortage of around 3.2
million housing units relative to population demand in the
United States. I know in my home state of Maryland we're
talking about a shortage of at least 96,000 units. There are a
number of programs designed to help address the supply thing.
You've all mentioned the low-income housing tax credit piece.
There's also the Home Investment Partnership Program, Community
Development Block Grant (CDBG). If you could, Mrs. Ventura, and
maybe Mr. Boyce, just speak briefly to how those programs can
help expand the supply of housing and therefore improve the
situation with respect to affordability.
Mrs. Ventura. The programs that you mentioned, the Home
Program, the Capital Magnet Fund, and the National Housing
Trust are all critically important programs, and we use them in
partnership with the 9 percent credits, the 4 percent housing
credits. Without those resources, we would not have the numbers
that we have in Rhode Island in terms of production and
preservation of housing, so they are terrific programs. We hope
for more resources to be invested in these programs so that we
can do more for the people of our state.
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you.
Mrs. Ventura. Thank you.
Senator Van Hollen. Mr. Boyce.
Mr. Boyce. Thank you for the question, Senator. I would
just add to Carol's comments that CDBG funds, in particular, in
home funds I know in Franklin County have allowed us to use
those funds to invest in infrastructure dollars that often can
tie directly into a specific development to reduce the cost of
rent or the cost of purchase on those homes. And so, to me,
there is a direct correlation to the ability to access more
affordable and quality housing.
The other point I would like to raise is just that it
allows us, as counties, to think about the public
infrastructure, ranging from roads and streets to public
transit access and even planning of medical resources, medical
institutions and so forth. And so, all of those are things that
we, as county commissioners, take into account when we're
planning out the growth or development of certain corridors
within our community.
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you and thank you all. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Senator Kaine. Senator Merkley.
STATEMENT OF SENATOR MERKLEY
Senator Merkley. The shortage that my colleague from
Maryland mentioned is certainly true in Oregon. We estimated
we're about 110,000 units short, but in addition, we have the
challenge that any developer wants to develop high end housing
because there's so many folks to the south of us in California
in the San Francisco area where the Dot Com boosted the value
of houses, so you can sell your house for a million plus
dollars to move to Oregon. So, there was a ready supply of
buyers for high-end and so a developer doesn't want to develop
normal family housing when they can make more money building
McMansions.
I want to turn to a different part of the puzzle, though,
and that is the involvement in hedge funds. Since 2009, when we
had massive foreclosures, they were sold in bulks of a thousand
or more houses at a time. The only people that could buy them
were hedge funds. Hedge funds discovered that this was a
fabulous investment, both from appreciation, appreciation that
would've gone to middle-class families.
I lobbied the Obama Administration hard to make them
available to families because they were being sold 50 cents on
the dollar at the time and they said it was just to complicated
and they were worried about slowing the process where houses
might be exposed to frozen pipes or vandals stripping copper
and so forth. But the long and short of it is the hedge funds
became deeply invested in this market and they've continued to
do so seeing how fabulously profitable it is.
They're buying now about a quarter of the houses that are
available, especially in the southern marketplaces like Phoenix
and Atlanta, but it's affecting states like Oregon as well. Ms.
Bailey, this situation affects rents and the price of
homeownership both and people have said, well, how does it
affect the renters. And my basic understanding that I want
clarification from you on is, first of all, if an investor pays
more for a house, they're going to charge higher rents. It's
going to drive up the rental market, in general. But also, if
renters who have the income to buy a house can no longer buy a
house because they're competing against a hedge fund that means
they don't move out of the rental housing and that rental
housing supply is going to remain shorter and therefore at a
higher market price. Can you help us understand? Are the hedge
funds having an impact on the affordability of rents as well as
home ownership?
Ms. Bailey. Yes, Senator. As you explained it, that's
exactly right. We're really concerned about renters, especially
higher-income renters who are staying in the market longer than
they would otherwise and therefore driving up the cost because
30 percent of their income is higher and so they can pay more.
But we're also concerned for the renters themselves, not only
paying more rent, but also for families, in particular families
with kids.
Single-family housing is one of the ways--it's really
important to them. It provides the size, it's often in places
with better schools and other amenities that families with kids
need and so we really need to maintain affordability in the
single-family rental market for low-income families with kids.
Senator Merkley. I really saw when I was director of
Habitat for Humanity how an affordable mortgage or affordable
rental housing was huge to the stability of family, and I saw
kids whose lives improved enormously when they had that stake
in the community through an affordable, decent home and a
decent community.
Mrs. Ventura, your organization has helped tens of
thousands of families enter home ownership through mortgage
financed programs and tens of thousands that is awesome. That
is tremendous. Now, if the hedge funds are targeting, if they
were, I don't know to what degree they are, start targeting
Rhode Island and driving up the prices how would that affect
the opportunity of families to buy homes? Because they'd then
be competing against all cash, no inspection offers at a higher
price point than the houses have been shortly before?
Mrs. Ventura. So, Senator, I haven't heard that hedge funds
are buying properties in Rhode Island. It's possible. I think
that single family opportunities in Rhode Island, the
opportunity to either lease a home or purchase a home is
challenging. We're not building enough single-family inventory
now. You mentioned Habitat and thank you for your work with
Habitat. Habitat affiliates in Rhode Island do a terrific job
providing just those opportunities, but we need to do more in
our state in providing financing opportunities to develop that
next level, leaving rental, home ownership, affordable
homeownership, and the ability to build wealth.
Senator Merkley. Thank you. And I hope for our sake they
don't start to target Rhode Island. You can visit your
colleagues in Atlanta and Phoenix to find out the impact, or in
Oregon.
Ms. Bailey, several state legislatures, including Oregon,
have considered creating a rental housing registry system to
provide clear data on landlords and homes in the rental market
to really understand the dynamics of that market better. Would
the benefits outweigh the challenges in setting up this kind of
registry system?
Ms. Bailey. Senator, it could. It could really help.
Sometimes it's a black box, related to renting and being able
to locate units for families, so putting in the resources that
it would take to be able to--and making it as easy as possible
for landlords to register, putting in the resources to maintain
a system like that could play a significant role in helping
families find a place to live. Right now, we know that housing
authorities and other housing agencies are having to use
resources to pay for realtors and others in order to help
people with low incomes find rental units. Oftentimes, many of
us have to do the same thing. Having such a registry could make
a difference in just making it easier to access rental housing.
Senator Merkley. I'll just close out with a comment on the
hedge funds side. We have all our traditional programs, for
example, housing vouchers. I spent an afternoon calling in the
westside of Portland trying to find an apartment that would
take a housing voucher and all the rents were way above the
housing, so I didn't find one. And I just did that to kind of
understand it personally. So, we have to amplify all of those
programs, but we also have this factor, this factor since 2009
that has become a competitor with ordinary American families
for basic, three-bedroom family--two or three-bedroom family
house. That is something we could do that could make a profound
difference that doesn't cost the government a single dime and
then we should do it. We should get the hedge funds out of the
housing business. Thanks.
Senator Kaine. Thank you, Senator Merkley. Here's what
we're going to do. We have a vote that will start in a couple
minutes. Senator Johnson has one additional point or question.
I have one for Mrs. Ventura and then we're going to adjourn the
hearing. Senator Johnson.
Senator Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman
Whitehouse did ask Mr. Slover if he would give some thought to
and provide questions for the record. I want to make the same
request from all of you and this is a very sincere request. As
I said in my questioning, and it's been kind of reinforced
throughout this thing. We've got a problem of supply. We have
tremendous demand, whether it's from hedge funds, whether it's
from $100 billion plus in government funding--and again, I come
from free market system. I've got a great deal of respect for
how a functioning market responds to demand, you know, from
high end all the way to low end products.
So, there's a breakdown in the marketplace. I have my
suspicion. I used one example of a very well-intentioned
program that I'm sure does a lot of good. The low-income
housing tax credit, but it has some unintended consequences.
And Mr. Slover, you talked about it, unintended consequences in
the D.C. market as well. So, I guess I'm really asking all of
you to give some real thought to what is the fundamental root
causes. And again, I think it's a little more complex. I think
there are a number of factors in here, but what is preventing
the market from responding to the demand?
When you heard a figure of 3.3 million housing units, so
that's a market opportunity and it doesn't necessarily have to
be three, four, five hundred thousand dollar homes. I know in
Oshkosh, philanthropists funded I think something like 50 micro
housing units for families to get in. And again, it maybe not
be where everybody would want to live, but it's clean, it's
safe. There are alternatives here the marketplace can respond
to, so it's really a very sincere request if you can really
rack your brain and go, what is preventing the market from
responding with all this demand? There is. There's tremendous
demand. There are tremendous dollars being thrown at this. Why
do we have such a constriction of the supply?
Senator Kaine. If I could, just to back to what I was
talking about my fair housing career, first-time homeownership
is really important and yet there's significant racial
disparities. The racial homeownership gap in Virginia is more
than 20 percent. A lot of the federal programs we've talked
about today deal with affordable rentals and of course that's
very, very important, but I think we need to look at smart
strategies that will help more people become homeowners.
I've joined with Senators Warner and Warnock on a bill, the
LIFT Act, which would provide more affordable mortgage options
for first generation homeowners. And I understand, Mrs.
Ventura, that Rhode Island Housing has piloted a down payment
and closing cost assistance program for first generation
homebuyers who complete a homeowner education course. Talk a
little bit about that program and what you've learned that
might be helpful to us as we think about trying to do something
similar.
Mrs. Ventura. Yes. Thank you for asking about this program.
We did a pilot a first gen downpayment assistance program. It
is geographically targeted in areas that have very high
concentrations of low-income renters, so it tends to be in our
urban core, and we provide a $25,000 grant to participants in
the program. They have to complete a higher level of homebuyer
assistance in our traditional downpayment assistance program.
We think that it's important to educate them as they are first
generation buyers. And so, they can take that $25,000 down
payment and buy anywhere in the State of Rhode Island and we're
seeing a high percentage of people purchasing in what we would
call high opportunity areas, great schools. So, we believe
we're certainly moving the dial on creating homeownership
opportunities for people of color and we plan to continue it.
One other thing I would add, Senator, is we created a home
secure program that accompanies this. It's a $5,000 escrow that
we create for participants in the program and it's almost like
a security deposit if something goes wrong.
Senator Kaine. A major system, furnace, or something. Yes.
Mrs. Ventura. Exactly. Exactly. So, they can use that. If
they use their resources to pay for the boiler, if it goes,
then they can use that security fund to make their mortgage
payment. If at the end of five years, they don't use the
resource or whatever the balance is, we apply a principal
reduction to their mortgage.
Senator Kaine. Thank you for sharing about that. And to all
the witnesses, this has been a really good hearing. We
appreciate the work that you all do, your willingness to
testify today, and we, obviously, have included your full
written statements in the record. As information for all
senators, should any senators have questions, and you've gotten
a couple of questions from the record from Senator Johnson and
Senator Whitehouse, particularly to Mr. Slover and others. If
any other senators want to put questions in from the record, we
would ask that they do that by noon tomorrow. Email copies will
be accepted. And then, if there are such questions, some have
been raised already, we would ask witnesses to try to respond
within seven days of receipt. With no further business before
the Committee, and with a vote on, the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:36 a.m., Wednesday, January 31, 2024, the
hearing was adjourned.]

