SACRED MISSION:
HONORING AMERICA'S VETERANS
AND THEIR FAMILIES AT VA CEMETERIES
----------
WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 28, 2024
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 3:30 p.m., in
Room SR-418, Russell Senate Office Building, Hon. Jon Tester,
Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
Present: Senators Tester, Brown, Blumenthal, Hirono,
Manchin, Sinema, Hassan, King, Moran, Sullivan, and Cramer.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JERRY MORAN,
RANKING MEMBER, U.S. SENATOR FROM KANSAS
Senator Moran . I am pleased to be here. Senator
Tester is just voting and will be here shortly.
I thank him, Senator Tester, and for our witnesses for the
opportunity to have this hearing. This one I look forward to,
and I think of all the times that I have visited cemeteries
across the country and battle monuments around the world, and
at every time, every moment that I am there it is felt with
respect and high regard, and I see how well our cemeteries are
maintained and how well Americans, Kansans in particular, are
treated in moments of need.
And it has been going on for 50 years. Senator Tester and I
acknowledged that 50-year anniversary with a Senate-passed
resolution last year, and I commend the leadership and the NCA
workforce for their great work.
When mourning a death, the last thing a grieving family
needs is some bureaucratic hurdle or some substandard support.
NCA, for the seventh consecutive ranking, has placed first
among all public and private organizations recognized by the
American Customer Satisfaction Index for providing exemplary
service to veterans and their families.
In 2022, the NCA achieved a customer satisfaction record of
97. Matt, I do not know whether I am taking away your
testimony.
Mr. Quinn. We are down to 2 minutes, sir.

Senator Moran. That is the highest on record, and that is a
testament to the wonderful work of the National Cemetery
Administration's team members across the country.
To help serve more veterans with burial options, NCA grants
awards to States, tribes, and territorial partners through the
Veteran Cemetery Grant Program. To date, NCA has awarded more
than $1 billion to assist States, territories, and tribal
governments in establishing, expanding, and operating veteran
cemeteries that complement NCA facilities and help expand
burial access, particular in rural and underserved areas.
Kansas has been the beneficiary of that on numerous occasions,
and most recently in 2021 and 2023, grants were awarded to
expand both our cemetery at Fort Dodge and the one in Winfield,
run by our Kansas Commission on Veteran Affairs.
I look forward to hearing from all of our witnesses today
and look for ways that we can be helpful to continue this
success story and to honor those who served our country.
I welcome our witnesses today, including the Director of
the Kansas Commission on Veterans Affairs, Retired Brigadier
General William Turner. Director Turner, General Turner leads
the commission's efforts in Kansas to assist Kansas veterans
with, of course, a wide array of programs and services. Those
services include filing claims for VA and State veteran
benefits, assisting veterans and their families in obtaining
earned medals and military awards, running two State veterans
homes, one in Fort Dodge, one in Winfield, and managing our
four State veterans cemeteries--WaKeeney, Winfield, Fort Dodge,
and Fort Riley.
I was around when those sites were selected in Kansas. I am
a western Kansan, and the one in WaKeeney surprised me. I can
tell you it is one of the most beautiful places that really
showcase what a western Kansas sunset is and what it would mean
to be buried in a place called home.
Thank you, Director Turner, for making the trip here today
and for you and your team's work on behalf of our veterans. I
appreciate the way that you work very closely with me and my
team on behalf of Kansas veterans.
Thank you all for being here, and I think we will call upon
our first witness, who is now down to 1 minute, the Honorable
Matthew Quinn, Department of Veterans Affairs. Welcome.
PANEL I
----------
STATEMENT OF THE HON. MATTHEW QUINN, UNDER SECRETARY FOR
MEMORIAL AFFAIRS, NATIONAL CEMETERY ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT
OF VETERANS AFFAIRS
Mr. Quinn. Good afternoon Ranking Member Moran and Members
of the Committee. Thank you for inviting me to discuss the
National Cemetery Administration and the great things we do for
America's veterans and their families. I am honored to be here
to highlight some of NCA's recent accomplishments while also
sharing my four key areas for this year.
NCA memorializes our Nation's heroes and provides perpetual
care for more than 5 million gravesites, maintaining national
shrine standards in our 155 VA national cemeteries.
Last year, which was our 50th anniversary, we interred more
than 137,000 veterans and eligible family members, we provided
more than 333,000 headstones and markers, and we prepared more
than 427,000 Presidential Memorial Certificates.
NCA supports families at their most difficult times, with
the unwavering promise to care for their deceased loved ones in
perpetuity. Thanks to the outstanding NCA professionals we are
consistently recognized for excellent customer satisfaction. We
know we have just one chance to get it right, to honor veterans
and their families for their service and sacrifice at their
most vulnerable time.
My four main focus areas are awareness, access,
modernization, and memorialization. These will ensure that NCA
continues providing the best possible service to veterans.
These priorities align with our core mission and long-range
plan.
Increasing awareness is a top priority, as we ensure
veterans are aware of the memorial benefits they have earned.
One way we are doing this is by working with VBA and VHA to
encourage all veterans to consider end-of-life planning long
before they will need it. Together we educate veterans, their
families, VSOs, and other stakeholders on end-of-life benefits
and services administered by the entire VA.
We are also committed to increasing access to dignified
burial options for veterans close to where they live. Nearly 94
percent of all veterans live within 75 miles of a national or
grant-funded cemetery. We are close to our strategic goal of 95
percent, and we will soon open cemeteries in New York, Nevada,
and Utah. Partnering with States, territories, and tribes helps
us reach our goal. Last year our Veteran Cemetery Grants
Program surpassed $1 billion in funding since the program's
inception in 1978. We currently support 122 cemeteries through
this exemplary Federal-State partnership.
Modernizing our information technology systems has been a
priority, and we have made substantial progress. Previously,
veterans waited 60 to 90 days for pre-need eligibility
determinations. Today, most have an answer within days, and we
continue to streamline other eligibility determinations.
We also use technology to improve how we memorialize 10
million veterans through our online Veterans Legacy Memorial.
Last year we added 5 million veterans and are exploring the
possibility of enabling living veterans to help prepare their
own online memorial pages by uploading photos, stories, and
mementos.
At NCA we do what we can to preserve the legacies of all
who served. Just days ago, we helped right a wrong from a
century ago, when soldiers of the 24th Infantry were executed
following mass courts martial after the 1917 Houston riots.
Last November, the Army overturned its own unjust convictions
of these soldiers and upgraded their discharges to honorable.
This allowed NCA to engrave and install new headstones at Fort
Sam Houston National Cemetery, reflecting the same information
found on every other headstone--the soldier's unit, rank, home
state, and date of death.
Mr. Chairman, since joining VA I have witnessed firsthand
how NCA's burial and memorial benefits have made a profound
difference in the lives of veterans and their families,
underscoring the Nation's gratitude to those who wore the
uniform to defend the freedoms we enjoy. I know you and the
Committee share my admiration for this organization, and we are
grateful for your enduring support.
I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Quinn appears on page 39 of
the Appendix.]
HON. JON TESTER, CHAIRMAN,
U.S. SENATOR FROM MONTANA
Chairman Tester . Secretary Quinn, thank you for
being here. I apologize for being a little late, but I also
want to thank my Ranking Member, Senator Moran, for keeping the
train somewhat on time. I appreciate what you have done and
what you are doing, and thank you for being here today.
I am going to start where you ended, and that is the 17 new
headstones for the veterans at Fort Sam Houston who were
wrongly accused of murder and mutiny. The families fought for
decades, got the record righted, and you guys stepped up.
What else can you do, NCA do, to help bring more stories
like this to light and help the wrongs of the past, and are you
working on anything specifically right now?
Mr. Quinn. Yes, Senator. Again, this was an incredible
ceremony to attend. I attended the ceremony in Houston when the
Army announced that they had overturned the convictions and
again when we unveiled the markers.
I will tell you, making sure that all veterans are honored
in the fashion that they should be honored really was the theme
of what we did last week. We have got a team that continues to
work with underserved communities across the Nation. We were up
in York, Pennsylvania, last Martin Luther King Day, making sure
that veterans in that cemetery--the cemetery had been run down,
if you will--making sure that those veterans' markers were
restored to the condition that they should be, or we ordered
new markers. And we will continue to do that in underserved
communities.
I would tell you the Veterans Legacy Grant Program is
another way that we look at underserved communities and make
sure that veterans who have served are properly honored and
building that history of the veteran's service.
So those are ways that we will continue to honor those.
Chairman Tester. I appreciate that. We are going to kind of
continue down the line. You are leading. It is on the States
and tribal organizations to maintain and operate these
cemeteries after they are established. We are talking the
grants, the granted ones. They must comply with the same shrine
standards as national cemeteries. So the question is a multi-
question. Are the grant program cemeteries maintaining these
standards, and what are the consequences if they fail to
maintain these standards?
Mr. Quinn. Yes, sir. So we inspect our grant-funded
cemeteries and our national cemeteries at the same standards
every 4 years, so we have been out to the grant-funded
cemeteries. Are all of them at the same standards? No. But I
would also tell you I have been to some grant-funded cemeteries
that look a little bit better than our national cemeteries. So
we will go out and continue to inspect all of those cemeteries,
to include our own.
Here last year, we were working with a State, and we
continue to work with a State, that wasn't upkeeping the
standards that they need to keep. So we sent a letter to the
State. I communicated with the Governor. I communicated with
the Director of Veterans Affairs and said, okay, for these
three cemeteries that we have been working with and have not
seen any progress we are going to withhold future grants. So
for that cemetery to get a future grant they are going to have
to bring their cemetery up to all of the critical standards
that we inspect them on, and 90 percent of the high priority
standards.
So these are through an inspection that we do, but that is
where we are going to hold States responsible.
Chairman Tester. Just kind of carrying on on that, when
folks apply for these grants are they informed of their
obligation that it is grant money but they still have an
obligation to make sure these cemeteries are up to the
standards that our veterans deserve?
Mr. Quinn. Absolutely aware of it. And again, last year the
steps we took, that is the first time I am aware that the steps
have been taken that we have withheld future grants.
Chairman Tester. Yep.
Mr. Quinn. States are aware of their responsibilities. Yes,
sir.
Chairman Tester. You correct me if I am wrong, but I
believe there are 120 cemeteries in 49 States that have
utilized the Veteran Cemetery Grant Program. That should be
pretty accurate. It came from my crack staff.
Mr. Quinn. Your crack staff is two shy. It is 122 grant-
funded State, territorial, and tribal.
Chairman Tester. All right. We will dock some pay on that.
Okay. Because of a lack of resources NCA has been able to
fulfill their priority one list of grant applications, priority
one list, causing those proposals to carry over to the
following year. Could you tell us, Secretary Quinn, how many
grant proposals are over a year old and how many are over 5
years old?
Mr. Quinn. Yes, sir. So we are going to get through about
18 grant requests this year off of that list. So we have 51
that won't be included on this year's funding----
Chairman Tester. So they would be----
Mr. Quinn . So those would be considered 1 year
old.
Chairman Tester. Okay.
Mr. Quinn. Of those 51, 26 have aged more than 5 years.
Chairman Tester. Any idea on how much it would cost to
complete the 26?
Mr. Quinn. Yes, sir. So it would be about 200-and-some
million dollars, about $220 million. Now, Senator, they will
submit a grant request. We look to make sure it is conforming
to all the regs and requirements. But it would be about $226
million to get all the way through the list. We prioritize
expansions. We do not want cemeteries to close. The second
priority is establishments of new cemeteries. And then you have
got O&M, operations and maintenance, and you have got
infrastructure. So it would 220-and-some million dollars.
Chairman Tester. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Quinn. Yes, sir.
Chairman Tester. I was not here when the Senators came in
so I am just going to go with the nicest Senator first, Senator
Hassan.
HON. MARGARET WOOD HASSAN,
U.S. SENATOR FROM NEW HAMPSHIRE
Senator Hassan. Thank you but, you know, I have a really
nice neighbor from Maine here too. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Secretary Quinn, for being here.
You know, every time I visit our New Hampshire State
Veterans Cemetery in Boscawen. I am obviously reminded of the
incredible sacrifices that our servicemembers and their
families make. I am also reminded of how important the cemetery
is to our State, our communities, whether it is people
gathering to place flags on graves on Memorial Day, whether it
is holiday time and a wreath goes on every grave. People come,
and it is like they are remembering what is important again--
freedom and family and home, right.
So I am very grateful to all of you. I am grateful to the
State cemetery staff who do a wonderful job keeping our
beautiful cemetery beautiful and meaningful.
But today I also want to talk about Sergeant David LeBlanc
and his wife, Cheryl, of Nottingham, New Hampshire. Cheryl
never stopped believing that maybe one day her husband would be
able to be interred in Boscawen. David and Cheryl were high
school sweethearts at Manchester High School West. Cheryl
remembers David's National Guard service in the 1970s and his
deep commitment to serving our country.
Sergeant David LeBlanc died on June 8, 2016, and for 6
years Cheryl kept his urn at home because she hoped that some
day he could be buried among his peers in the State veterans
cemetery. David initially was not eligible for burial at
Boscawen because despite his 6 years of service to our country
he was part of the National Guard, so until recently he was not
eligible.
But I was so pleased and honored to be able to work with
Senator Cramer and others to pass the Burial Equity for Guard
and Reserve Act into law in 2022, which enabled States to
expand burial eligibility to members of the National Guard and
Reserve without losing the cemetery's VA funding.
David was the first Granite Stater to benefit from this
change of law, and he was laid to rest in Boscawen on the sixth
anniversary of his death. David's years in the National Guard
showed his commitment to our Nation, and as Cheryl put it, this
expanded eligibility helps to show that these servicemembers
are never forgotten.
So the Burial Equity Act has helped additional veterans
like David LeBlanc be laid to rest in State veterans
cemeteries. As you mentioned in your testimony, the Veteran
Cemetery Grants Program helps State veterans cemeteries improve
and expand. Can you please discuss the importance of the
Veteran Cemetery Grants Program and its support to State
veterans cemeteries, especially as these cemeteries allow more
families to bury their loved ones who served with the National
Guard and Reserve.
Mr. Quinn. Senator, a great question, and I will tell you,
and I tell every State that I visit too, the partnership
between the Federal Government and the State, tribal, and
territorial governments through the Veteran Cemetery Grant
Program I think is one of the best relationships that is out
there. I mentioned 94 percent of veterans have a cemetery
within 75 miles of where they live. Through the NCA we would
only be at about 77 percent, so the States have augmented that
and we see States continuing to want to build those
cemeteries--and then augment that with--I served in the
National Guard 28 years, so augment that support that they
provide to all veterans with the ability of Guard Reservists to
be interred within that cemetery with those that they have
served with. I have seen Guard members do a lot of things that
they just did not meet the active duty time. So I greatly
appreciated the Guard Reserve Burial Equity Bill, but that
partnership, I think, is the best between the Federal
Government and the State, tribal, and territorial governments.
Senator Hassan. Well, thank you, and I look forward to
continuing to work with you on that.
I wanted to turn to kind of the more general issue of
supporting families. Most, if not all, veterans will tell you
that their service required sacrifices of their families,
something we all try to recognize as much as we can. In your
testimony you touched upon how the VA supports veterans'
families, including through the availability of burial to
spouses and certain family members. You also mentioned how
comforting it can be to families when they learn of these
benefits.
How can the VA better communicate to veterans and their
families that they may be eligible for these benefits, because
I think some families really do not know.
Mr. Quinn. Yes, Senator. So only 22 percent of veterans
take advantage of interment within a national or a grant-funded
cemetery, 16 percent in a national cemetery and about 6 percent
in grant-funded cemeteries. So that is why we are doing this
end-of-life planning, talking to veterans, talking through
VSOs. VHA is on board. VBA is on board. But we need to get the
word out that this is the final benefit that the Nation will be
able to provide to you for your service, and so we have got to
get the word out. We will continue to beat that drum, but we
need to increase that knowledge of the benefit that is out
there.
Senator Hassan. Well, thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
Secretary Quinn, thank you for your service as well.
Chairman Tester. Most Honorable Senator King.
Senator King. Too late, Mr. Chairman. The damage is done.

HON. ANGUS S. KING, JR.,
U.S. SENATOR FROM MAINE
Senator King. Thank you so much for being with us today.
This is a sacred topic. One of the first national cemeteries
was in Maine, in Togus, in 1866. That cemetery is full and it
has no greater capacity. We now have another national cemetery
at Acadia National Cemetery in Jonesboro. We also have four
State veterans cemeteries in Maine, and I am proud to say that
as Governor, Earl Adams, my Adjutant General, and I worked hard
to establish two of those, in Caribou and Springvale, Maine.
And I have spent hours at both of those. They are inspiring,
wonderful places.
I want to go back to the awareness. My question was what
percent, and you just answered it, 22 percent. I find that
surprising. You mentioned awareness, and do you work through
the VSOs? It would be interesting to do a poll of veterans and
say do you know that there is interment opportunity for you and
members of your family.
Mr. Quinn. Yes, Senator, I would tell you we have polled.
It was a fairly small number, but we did a polling through our
Veterans Experience Office, and only about 35 percent were
aware of the benefit that was out there.
Senator King. Or even aware that it was available.
Mr. Quinn. Yes, sir. So 22 percent, 16 percent in the
national, 6 percent in grant-funded cemeteries. But we are
working very hard to get the word out.
Senator King. Well, I hope you will continue to do that
because it is such a meaningful benefit and it is so meaningful
to the families. The times that I have spent at those
cemeteries have been enormously moving.
The other piece that I think deserves some mention is the
volunteers. Being at these, particularly at the grant-funded
cemeteries, tremendous volunteer support. There are people that
really made those cemeteries go, and I hope that there is an
ability to recognize and support those volunteer organizations.
Mr. Quinn. Yes, Senator, I will take that back. I will tell
you, not only the Honor Guard, which are typically volunteers
or will work with the military, but also when I go to visit our
national cemeteries or grant-funded cemeteries, the volunteers
that are sitting at the front desk----
Senator King. Right.
Mr. Quinn . Helping people who are there to
visit, I think those are the unsung heroes. And I think our
cemeteries that operate the most efficiently and the best in
terms of information, it is those volunteers that are manning
the desk, talking to fellow veterans when they come in. I think
they are----
Senator King. Raising money.
Mr. Quinn. Raising money for the cemetery, yes sir.
Senator King. Raising awareness. So I hope that might be a
bit of a focus of your work is to find ways to recognize and
acknowledge those volunteers because I think they are really
important.
Now I have a really important question. The flagpole at
Togus has been damaged severely in a storm. We are having
trouble getting it fixed because of some difficulty in the
payment methodology with the VA and the cemetery. So if you can
help me with getting the flagpole at Togus back into service
that would be important to veterans in Maine.
Mr. Quinn. Sir, it would not be the first flagpole I
noticed that was not operational that I ended up getting fixed,
so I will take that on, and I will find out what is going on in
Togus.
Contracting support has been tough post-COVID.
Senator King. Sure.
Mr. Quinn. We have seen higher costs. But we will work on
Togus. We will get that flagpole fixed. It is important to have
a flag over our national cemetery.
Senator King. It certainly is, and particularly one of our
oldest. What is our oldest national cemetery?
Mr. Quinn. So usually about 1862 is when Abraham Lincoln
said, ``Hey, we need national cemeteries'' for our Civil War
dead. So 1862 would be the oldest, when we first established.
Senator King. Thank you. Thank you very much for your work
and for your testimony. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Quinn. Thank you, Senator.
Chairman Tester. Senator Hirono.
Senator Hirono. You are going to need to give me a minute.
Chairman Tester. No, I am sorry. If you are going to not
ask questions right now then I am going to Moran.

Senator Moran. I suggested that he go to you, Senator
Hirono, and I was hoping to get a pat on the back from you, but
apparently I made a mistake.

Senator Hirono. I never know when you are pulling my leg.
Chairman Tester. That is true.
HON. MAZIE K. HIRONO,
U.S. SENATOR FROM HAWAII
Senator Hirono. Okay. So I do have some questions for the
Secretary. I have heard from those who oversee our State
veterans cemeteries that they do struggle year after year with
two key issues, one, to ensure enough funding is available for
day-to-day operations, and two, to maintain proper training for
staff in high turnover positions.
How frequently does NCA hear about State veterans
cemeteries dealing with funding and personnel issues, and are
there ways Congress and VA can better support State veterans
cemeteries, particularly when it comes to training in high
turnover positions?
Mr. Quinn. Yes, Senator. So we are routinely visiting with
cemeteries and the States that are operating grant-funded
cemeteries. And we have done specific training. Congress passed
a law recently that allowed for us to pay for the training of
cemetery employees through the grant program.
But I will tell you, also in Hawaii, we invited some of the
neighboring island cemetery employees over to the Punchbowl to
train with our crews, to learn what they are looking for in a
national cemetery, how best to operate and maintain a national
cemetery. And we will continue to offer that to our State
partners.
Again, I think we pushed harder on that than we have in the
past, and I will continue to push hard. I want that partnership
not only at the national level, between national and States,
but I also want it between a national cemetery within a State
and those State grant-funded cemeteries and the employees that
are there.
Senator Hirono. So do we need to provide more funding to
enable you to reach out in this way?
Mr. Quinn. I think we can continue to reach out--I hate to
stay away from the funding question--but we can continue to
reach out and bring those employees to our cemetery to train,
and we will. I think it is a matter of, you know, some States
see it, well, that is a national cemetery and you have your own
funding, and we have to deal with our own issues. And certainly
they are unique issues.
But I think bringing those crews together, I think we can
learn from the States, frankly, and I think the States can
learn from us. I will continue to push that, Senator.
Senator Hirono. I think that is a very good approach, that
it is not just you are in your silo and they are in theirs. So
thank you very much for that kind of cooperative effort. I
appreciate it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Tester. You are very welcome.
Senator King. Mr. Chairman, could I interject for one
moment, please?
Chairman Tester. Let me ask, Senator Moran. Can he----
Senator King. May I?
Chairman Tester . Yes, go ahead.
Senator Moran. Yes.
Senator King. I want to mention, and I should have
mentioned before, I mentioned the Caribou cemetery. One of the
key people in establishing that cemetery was Senator Collins'
father----
Chairman Tester. Oh, no kidding.
Senator King . Don Collins. And I just wanted
to acknowledge that. He was a key mover in getting that
cemetery established.
Chairman Tester. That is cool. Senator Manchin.
HON. JOE MANCHIN III,
U.S. SENATOR FROM WEST VIRGINIA
Senator Manchin. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr.
Quinn, first of all, we had a chance to speak and I appreciate
it very much. And I want to go over this, and I think it would
be of great interest to both the Ranking Member and the Chair.
Hershel ``Woody'' Williams, as I think you will recall, he
was the last surviving Medal of Honor winner from World War II.
He passed away and he was from West Virginia. But there were
five of them, and Woody outlasted the other four. He was the
last one standing and went down a couple of years ago. He had
something which he was really committed to for a long, long
time, and that is the, oh, we called it the committal shelters,
you know, when they go to the cemetery. These are open areas,
and it is very, very inclement weather in Montana, Kansas, West
Virginia. And we are talking about trying to get a pilot
program, and I have a bill that we have written. But I wanted
to see if it would be a bill that the Committee here would
entertain to work with Mr. Quinn.
He and I have talked about this, and it is a pilot project.
It is a $2 million pilot project. It is 50 percent from the
Feds, from the VA, and 50 percent from the locals to build
these. And we would fund three of them, and basically inclement
weather and things of that sort, because some of them, families
cannot even attend it is so bad.
So this is what we have been working on, and I would like
to have any type of input you might have on that, Mr. Quinn,
because like I said, we have all of our approved VA cemeteries,
and then we have State cemeteries that are for veterans only.
So we do not want to exclude anybody at the primary veteran
cemetery.
But what are your thoughts on that, and how could we
proceed with this?
Mr. Quinn. Senator, I appreciated the call earlier and your
interest in this. Coming from the great State of Montana, the
committal shelters are an area where families are gathering. I
do know that the bill is out there. We will take a look. If you
ask for technical assistance or views on it we will take a look
at it and see the mechanics of how best to do it.
But certainly I appreciate your compassion for this. I
certainly appreciate your interest and the honor of the great
Woody Williams, and we will work hard on this.
Senator Manchin. Well, those that come from Hawaii we
understand that sometimes they might not be as concerned
because they are enjoying the beautiful breeze and the nice
warm weather, and all that goes with Hawaii. But some of us who
live in Maine and some of the tougher areas, it is a tough time
having funerals. And this is a shelter it's just a total
enclosed shelter that we have been thinking of, up to 50
people. So that would handle most of our interments.
So we would really appreciate that. And I do have the bill,
which I would like to submit to the Committee to see if the
Committee would like to sponsor this bill with all of us, in a
bipartisan way, if that would be accepted.
Chairman Tester. We can take a look at it and then we can
tell you, Joe.
So here are my thoughts, in consultation with the Ranking
Member, we will take a look at the bill and then get a hearing
on it, gather some information, find out how many of these are
needed, get the Secretary's opinion on how best to implement
this bill, and then we will see if we can move from there.
Senator Manchin. We can do it on a pilot. The way the bill
is written is on a pilot.
Chairman Tester. Well, as long as the pilot is in Kansas
and Montana we are okay with that.

Senator Manchin. And West Virginia. Well, we might have to
put four. We have to have Maine, West Virginia--well, we will
gladly switch.
Senator Hirono. We have these in Hawaii, too.
Senator Manchin. Anyway, if I could do that. But I do
appreciate it, Mr. Quinn, and it is something that I think you
all will have to agree on, and all of our veterans here would
agree, if you have attended any of these funerals in some of
the harshest, inclement weather, it is unbelievable. And these
are older people, a lot of them, and it makes it very difficult
for them. So I think it is really a labor of love, if you will.
So without objection, I want to submit this for the record.
Chairman Tester. Without objection.
[The information referred to by Senator Manchin appears on
page 95 of the Appendix.]
Senator Manchin. Let me see if I have any more questions. I
do not think I do. I think you are doing a great job, and I
appreciate it.
Chairman Tester. Senator Moran.
Senator Moran. Mr. Quinn, thank you for your testimony. I
am sorry I stepped out while you were answering my colleague's
questions. We are trying to get six appropriation bills,
including VA HUD, on the Senate floor, which seems like we are
going to do before March 8th. Six of them apparently are
complete and six more to go by March 22nd.
I just wanted to make sure that there was something, that
if I would have missed you saying or something that you want to
make sure that I hear, I would welcome the opportunity to hear
from you.
Mr. Quinn. Senator, I appreciate it. All of the points I
raised were good ones, and hopefully they are in for the
record.
You know, we talked about, so last week we did a ceremony
at Fort Sam Houston where we honored 17 African Americans who,
through the largest court martial ever held by the U.S. Army,
they were hung after the 1917 Houston riots. And we were able,
based upon the upgrades to their discharges from dishonorable
to honorable, by the U.S. Army, and Secretary Wormuth, I
applaud her for taking that step, we were able to--previously
the markers for those African American gentlemen who were hung
and interred at Fort Sam Houston only had their name and a date
of death. That is all that was allowed at the time on markers
during that time period. Now that they are honorable we are
able to add name, State that they came from, their rank, their
unit, and the specific date of death, December of 1917.
It was just an incredible honor to attend that. Senator
Tester asked, you know, where else do we need to be doing that.
I think the Veterans Legacy Grant Program is one where we
continue to look at how to properly recognize veterans who have
served this Nation, what is the best way to do it. We continue
to look at underserved communities, to include rural veterans
and African American veterans.
And then we will continue to look at private cemeteries.
State cemeteries, grant-funded cemeteries are maintained at the
same standard as our national cemeteries as well. But private
cemeteries, if you visit a private cemetery you will see grave
markers for veterans that are in disrepair, broken, maybe lying
flat on the ground, so dirty you cannot even see them.
So we have been reaching out to communities to say, hey,
let us help you look through those cemeteries, find the
veterans' graves who are not maintained the way they should,
the markers, and we will work with that organization either to
clean them up or to order new markers for those who have
served. Every grave, every resting place of a veteran ought to
be a national shrine, not just if they are in a national
cemetery, but every place they are laid to rest. So we will
continue in that effort.
Senator Moran. Are those State cemeteries that may have
markers that are in disrepair, are they active still in
interring individuals, or are these cemeteries that are
generally no longer used?
Mr. Quinn. When I mentioned that, those are in the private
cemeteries, so not at the grant-funded cemeteries.
Senator Moran. No, I understand that. But are those private
cemeteries, are they old and historic and not in current use?
Mr. Quinn. I would say old and historic. Some are in
current use, but still not maintained. We had a cemetery in
southern Virginia where the markers were just laid in a pile,
not even placed on the grave. And so that is one that we
continue to work with as well.
Senator Moran. I was pleased to hear your story about Fort
Sam Houston, and if there are any other circumstances like that
we certainly want to be supportive of making the changes so
that everyone who deserves recognition is recognized.
Mr. Quinn. Senator, I appreciate that, and we will alert
the Committee.
Senator Moran. Okay.
Chairman Tester. Senator Cramer, if you are ready, you are
up.
HON. KEVIN CRAMER,
U.S. SENATOR FROM NORTH DAKOTA
Senator Cramer. Okay. General, good to see you. Thank you.
We talk about you a lot back home. Most of it is true.
Mr. Quinn. I am surprised I am not an honorary citizen of
North Dakota, as much time as I have spent there, Senator.
Senator Cramer. You should be. Well, first of all, I mean,
I need to say thank you, obviously, for coming through. Once we
came through with the legislation you came through big with the
help at Mandan, with the State cemetery and the columbarium. It
has made a world of difference, and it is a spectacular place,
as you know.
I guess I am as interested in anything just in your
thoughts going forward. You are familiar with the situation in
Fargo with the national cemetery. Another spectacular facility.
But as you know there are a lot of people that would love to
partner up. Sometimes they have the money. Sometimes they have
the will. Sometimes the bureaucracy gets in the way.
Maybe if you could just share a little bit, first of all,
with me, while we are in front of all these people, about the
Fargo situation, how you see that partnership playing out, and
how can I--and I know Senator Hoeven, it would be helpful--so
that we get the outcome that we want, I think that you want,
that your administration wants, and keep everybody happy with
the outcomes?
Mr. Quinn. Yes, Senator, we have worked hard on Fargo, as
you know, and land is an issue at our rural cemeteries. We
initially bought 5 acres at Fargo for our national cemetery.
The landowner said, ``Hey, I may sell all of this. This may be
subdivided,'' and so we jumped at the chance to acquire another
29 acres there, adjoining and around Fargo National Cemetery.
So that will keep that cemetery in operation for years and
years to come. That was a good move.
Currently we are working, not unlike Senator Manchin's
point, about committal shelters, we did add some walls around
the committal shelter at Fargo, the committal shelter, the
outdoor one we had built. But we continue to work with Senator
Hoeven on the community interest of donating funds for
potentially a Mandan-like facility. That is kind of where we
are going.
What would it take? So we are working that through our
Legal Department and we are working it through our Cemetery
Operations Department to see how can the community donate
either the funds or a building, what it would take to build out
that additional 30 acres. So we need to go through some
planning on that.
But certainly the community interest in Fargo is
incredible. The support of that cemetery is incredible. And
that's really what makes the cemetery shine is when you have
community support like we have in the Fargo community.
Senator Cramer. Well, and I appreciate that, and, you know,
regardless of what these two guys say, it is colder in Fargo
than either Kansas or Montana. And Angus, you have never seen
Fargo. He thinks Minot is flat, just so you know. He has no
idea how flat it is.
Senator King. If your dog runs away you can still see him
for 3 days.

Mr. Quinn. Typically the dogs will run west to Montana, out
of North Dakota.
Senator Cramer. So the facilities do matter, and I do
appreciate your patience with us. But at the same time I am
glad you are having this discussion, as I was coming up,
because I do think we have to be innovative. And I know that it
gets hard in the bureaucracy sometimes to do that. But if there
are ways that we can be helpful, whether it is policy-wise,
much like we did, you know, with the Equity Act, or with people
who have the enthusiasm, the interest, and resources to make
improvements, you know, we want to help them to be able to do
that, and we do not want the bureaucracy to get in the way, and
I appreciate anything that we can do to help.
Mr. Quinn. I think, you know, Fargo has pushed us,
actually, in terms of rural cemeteries and what should a rural
cemetery look like. And when the Rural Cemetery Program was
initially started it was going to be a very small plot, not
very many burials or not very many interments. We will have a
committal shelter, and a flagpole--really, that is it.
Senator Cramer. Right.
Mr. Quinn. And so Fargo pushed us to--we knew we needed a
maintenance or a storage facility. Fargo pushed us to put in a
toilet. There were no toilets there, and I think there was a
Port-a-Pot for a while, so we built a toilet. It actually froze
this winter, in North Dakota, with the North Dakota winter.
But we are going to continue to look at what is a rural
cemetery. We are building one in Elko, Nevada, and we are going
to be building one in Cedar City, Utah. We have to continue to
do that. And I would credit Fargo and the community there to
say, hey, Quinn, we think a rural cemetery should be a little
bit more than what you have there, and we will continue to work
through that.
Senator Cramer. I appreciate it. Thank you. That is all I
have, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Chairman Tester. If you are ready, Senator Sullivan.
Senator Sullivan. Yes, sir, Mr. Chairman, I am ready.
Chairman Tester. Go ahead.
HON. DAN SULLIVAN,
U.S. SENATOR FROM ALASKA
Senator Sullivan. Okay. Thank you. Mr. Under Secretary,
thank you, sir, for being here, and I want to begin by thanking
you and your team. We got that cemetery on Metlakatla. It is a
very unique place in Alaska, as you know. It is our only
reservation. We only have one Indian reservation in Alaska. It
is on an island in southeast Alaska called Metlakatla. And as
you know, sir, the Alaska Native community serves at higher
rates in the military than any other ethnic group in the
country. So this was a huge deal. You guys did a fantastic job.
I was there for the opening ceremony, which was so beautiful.
It was an unbelievable blue sky, not cloudless sky day. So that
is where you guys have done a great job.
Now I am going to ask you to help me on a couple of other
things that are important. My State has more vets per capita
than any State in the country, so these are really important
issues to my constituents.
The first one--and you might be aware of it, and I would
just like to get your commitment--we have a national cemetery
on Joint Base Elmendorf-Richardson, but that is on the military
side of the base. And it is a really, really difficult process
to have families go visit their loved ones who are buried
there. As a matter of fact, not to be too morbid here, but that
is where I intend to be buried, and I want my kids to be able
to go see me. And it is a really challenging situation. It
should not be. We have talked to you guys before, the military
folks. There is a way to do it. There is a road that could
access this. It would not create security issues.
I even have draft legislation if you need it to be able to
fix this. It is a very simple request. But right now so many of
the people, the families of the people buried in this very
beautiful cemetery, they cannot get there. You know, they have
to call ahead and wait in line, and when it is Memorial Day
weekend stuff it just becomes a complete, utter nightmare.
So are you familiar with this one, and can I get your
commitment to work with me and my team and the Department of
Veterans Affairs in Alaska? We have a whole bunch of good
solutions. We think they are very logical, common sense, and if
we can get your commitment to work with us on that, it should
not be so hard for families to visit their heroic loved ones in
this cemetery.
Mr. Quinn. Senator, after our ferry ride out to Metlakatla,
when we did that, we did stop at Fort Richardson and visit it,
and actually drove the ground. And from the cemetery director I
heard the same concerns. Families are having to wait 7 days or
notify the base.
I am certainly happy to take a look at the bill when you
have it, and I certainly commit to working with you on it.
We drove the grounds. I think there is maybe a solution.
Anything dealing with the base we would have to work with DoD--
--
Senator Sullivan. No, I get it.
Mr. Quinn. But I think there might be a solution there at
Fort Richardson, and that is what the cemetery director had
mentioned to me. You certainly have my commitment.
Senator Sullivan. Great. Thank you. And again, thanks for
the Metlakatla visit. It was very memorable. I forgot about our
great ferry ride out there.
Second is we are one of the only States, I think very few
States, that do not have a state-run and statewide VA cemetery.
The Metlakatla one, we love that one, but, you know, that was a
VA grant-awarded community, but as you know that is on a
reservation, hard to get to.
So the majority of the State, again, a State with more
veterans per capita than any other State, we actually do not
have a veteran cemetery. It is just the Metlakatla one and then
there is one in Sitka and there is one in JBER, but these are
not State veterans cemeteries.
So the State of Alaska has purchased land in Fairbanks. It
is beautiful property. And we have applied to receive a VA
cemetery grant. However, we keep getting--like we always miss
the cutoff. I think we were 28th this last time around. You
guys went down to 20. So, we are kind of scratching our heads
on how you grant awardees. We think we have a pretty strong
application. We have already bought the land, as a State. And
we do not have one, right. Again, I mean, we are very happy
about Metlakatla, but that one does not really count as a
statewide one.
So, again, will you commit to work with me, this Committee,
and the Alaska VA to get our first-ever statewide cemetery,
hopefully helped by the VA? Again, we have already purchased
the land. It is a beautiful site in Fairbanks, right in the
middle of the State, as you know. Can I get your commitment to
work with us on that?
Mr. Quinn. Sir, you have got my commitment, and I can just
talk briefly--I know, time. But we prioritize the expansions of
existing--We do not want a grant-funded cemetery to close, and
so that ends up being the priority. But we certainly will look
at the establishment criteria. And I know  Alaska is
sitting out there asking about it. In fact, I was hit up about
it at----
Senator Sullivan. I know you were. They are watching right
now.
Mr. Quinn. You have my commitment to help Alaska.
Senator Sullivan. Okay. Well, I mean, just to make that
point, I understand you want to help maintain the ones you
have. That makes total sense. But it also makes total sense to
help out the States that do not have anything yet, and we are
one of those States. So keep that in mind in your grant-making
criteria, but I look forward to working with you and our VA and
the people in Fairbanks who have already selected this land to
make more progress, the way we did in Metlakatla.
I will end, Mr. Chairman, just by thanking the Under
Secretary again. You guys did a great job on that cemetery. It
is beautiful. It is beyond everybody's expectations. And it was
a real honor that you came out. It is not easy to get there, as
you know, and it was a real honor that you came out for that
opening ceremony. Thank you again.
Mr. Quinn. Thank you, Senator, I appreciate it, and you
have got my commitment.
Senator Sullivan. Thank you.
Chairman Tester. Thank you, Senator Sullivan. Before we let
the Secretary go does anybody have a question that just needs
to be asked?

Chairman Tester. All right. You are excused, I would say,
Secretary Quinn. I just want to express my appreciation for
your good work, and thank you for your straightforward answers
today.
Now we will welcome our second panel up. First is going to
be Kelly Ackerman, who is Administrator for the Montana
Division of Veterans Affairs. Kelly, it is great to have you in
front of the Senate Veterans' Affairs Committee. Welcome.
Then we have General William Turner, Director of the Kansas
Commission on Veterans Affairs. Good to have you here, General
Turner.
And finally we are going to have Michael Figlioli, who is
Director of the National Veterans Service at the Veterans of
Foreign Wars. Michael, thank you for being here.
Did you have anything special you wanted to say about
General Turner, Senator Moran?
Senator Moran. I spoke highly of General Turner in your
absence, but in your presence I would speak highly of General
Turner once again, and I thank him for his leadership and the
tremendous efforts that he and his team in Kansas make to care
for those who served our Nation.
Chairman Tester. And the reason I asked you to do that is
then now I can say nice things about Kelly Ackerman, who is
just a marvelous asset for the great State of Montana and for
veterans all around this country. So thank you for being here,
Kelly. You have the floor.
Correct me if I am wrong, staff. They each have 5 minutes,
and know that your entire statement will be a part of the
record.
You may proceed, Kelly.
PANEL II
----------
STATEMENT OF KELLY ACKERMAN, ADMINISTRATOR,
MONTANA VETERANS AFFAIRS DIVISION
Ms. Ackerman. Thank you, Chairman Tester and Ranking Member
Moran, and Committee members. I appreciate the opportunity to
share information about Montana's State Veterans Affair's
Cemetery Program.
We currently have three State veterans cemeteries, all
established using the National Cemetery Administration Veterans
Cemetery Grant Program, and we have been approved by State
legislature and National Cemetery Administration for one
additional State veterans cemetery. We have nine FTE that staff
the three current cemeteries.
Our Eastern Montana State Veterans Cemetery in Miles City
was constructed in 2002, and recently finalized a National
Cemetery Administration expansion grant. It is our easternmost
State veterans cemetery, allowing veterans in rural eastern
Montana a State burial option. They have 851 interments filled,
and they have 2,946 available.
Western Montana State Veterans Cemetery in Missoula was
established in 2009. This cemetery is scheduled to receive a
National Cemetery Administration expansion grant in Federal
fiscal year 2025. They have 2,345 currently interred, and 1,052
available plots.
Established in 1988, Montana State Veterans Cemetery at
Fort Harrison is the State's oldest veteran cemetery and is the
largest of the three existing State veterans cemeteries. We
just began the design phase of a $2 million expansion grant,
which will add 1,680 plots. They have 5,470 veterans and family
members currently interred, with 446 plots available.
Because Montana is a predominately rural State, we
understand that not all veterans and their family members will
choose to be buried, or be able to be buried, in a veteran
cemetery, which seems to be an ongoing challenge. One of the
most effective tools we have determined to help veterans in
remote locations is to educate them on the Veterans Affairs
benefits available to them. These VA benefits include a free
headstone to veterans buried in a private cemetery, a medallion
to affix to private headstones, and potential burial benefits
to help with the cost of funeral expenses. Our staff help
servicemembers and veterans preregister for burial in one of
our State veterans cemeteries or help order VA headstones for
private cemeteries. These are just a few of the benefits
available to veterans during the burial process.
As was discussed, we have a tremendous amount of National
Guardsman in Montana, so there has been quite a bit of interest
in the Burial Equity for Guards and Reserves Act. Because this
is considered an ``unfunded'' bill, many of my counterparts
across the country have chosen not to participate in this
program, which is understandable. However, in Montana, even
though we required additional funding from Montana legislature,
we are participating as of July 1, 2023. We use State funding
to cover the cost of the veteran's burial since there is no VA
plot allowance provided, but we are not able to help the
spouses for their funding.
The operations and maintenance at each of our cemeteries
runs a little differently depending on the number of acres or
plots, and the number of FTE assigned. We were successful in
getting an additional FTE for each of our three cemeteries
during our last legislative session. We anticipate requesting
more FTE for our two larger cemeteries through our Veteran
Cemetery Grant Program. National Cemetery Administration staff
have made themselves available for questions, concerns, or
walked our new staff through processes. This is true for our
budget staff and our department A&E staff. There are ongoing
webinar calls for training and information sharing. The working
relationship we have with National Cemetery Staff is excellent,
and has provided for a solid foundation.
I want to thank the Committee for allowing me to share this
information with you, and this concludes my formal testimony.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Ackerman appears on page 46
of the Appendix.]
Chairman Tester. Thank you, Kelly.
Next up we have General Turner. General, you have the
floor.
STATEMENT OF BRIGADIER GENERAL (RET.) WILLIAM TURNER, DIRECTOR,
KANSAS COMMISSION ON VETERANS AFFAIRS OFFICE
Mr. Turner. Good afternoon, Chairman Tester, Ranking Member
Moran, and distinguished Members of the Committee. On behalf of
the Kelly administration, the Kansas Commission on Veterans
Affairs, and nearly 190,000 veterans that reside and call
Kansas home, thank you for the opportunity to present testimony
on our most sacred mission, honoring America's veterans and
their families at our State veterans cemeteries. I am truly
honored to be present before you today.
Our agency remains committed in honoring our veterans by
being their advocates and assisting them, along with their
families, in gaining access to Federal and State benefits that
they have earned. In addition, our services also include
skilled nursing care and interment options at our four State
veterans cemeteries.
With Kansas' legislative approval and thanks to the support
of the National Cemetery Administration's State Cemetery Grants
Program, the Kansas Veterans Cemetery at Fort Dodge was our
first veteran cemetery and was dedicated on November 1, 2002.
Since that time, we have gone on to proceed in the same manner
to construct three additional State veterans cemeteries in
WaKeeney and Winfield in 2004, and finally in Fort Riley,
Manhattan, in 2009. Our commitment and our obligation is
provide a dignified final resting place for our veterans,
spouses, and dependents that is maintained in a manner that
reflects proper respect.
Since 2002, the Kansas Veteran Cemetery Program has
provided beautiful and honorable final resting places for 5,996
veterans, spouses, and eligible dependents. Including our
national cemeteries, we are geographically positioned to serve
eligible veterans, including those who reside in our more rural
areas, who desire to be interred close to home in these sacred
shrines. This not only enables the nearby families and friends
to continue paying their respects, but it also allows the local
citizens to honor their services and express their gratitude as
they do so each year on Memorial Day and during Wreaths Across
America, so that their service will never be forgotten.
We appreciate not only our active duty component
organizations but also the Kansas National Guard and Reserve
units who steadfastly support our services. In addition, we
receive outstanding support from the many Veterans Service
Organizations within our State who faithfully provide honor
guards, parking, support, speakers, and much more, that always
make our services professional, dignified, and respectful. In
recent years, we have witnessed an increase in interments at
our cemeteries, and their support is vital to our success.
We perform our mission with a dedicated staff of 17
individuals, including our program director, and together they
do outstanding work. But illness, vacations, and retirements
can create challenges for such a small staff. Teamwork between
the four cemeteries has helped mitigate many of these
situations. Inclusive, the NCA also offers great training
opportunities to our staff. However, it is impossible to
anticipate services, and we do encounter challenges sending
individuals to attend NCA training due to the limited staff
depth. Alternatively, we have coordinated with our NCA parts in
the national cemeteries located within our State to
collectively train and remain proficient in all of our duties.
Equally important is maintaining our equipment, our grave
markers, and making necessary capital improvements to improve
each of our cemeteries. We continuously seek to enhance our
quality of service for those whom we serve. In so doing, as
Senator Moran had mentioned earlier, we did receive two grants
in 2021 and 2023, that provided enhanced services for our
columbarium walls at Fort Dodge and at Winfield.
To better serve veterans and help predict future needs, we
encourage veterans and their dependents to pre-certify, which
assists in mitigating stress on families and also possible
delays in scheduling at the greatest time of need. We presently
have 8,701 pre-certifications at one of our Kansas Veteran
Cemeteries. Clearly the trend for growth will continue at all
four State veterans cemeteries.
Finally, the Kansas Veteran Cemetery Program has been
honored to be recognized for its excellence in performance and
service by the National Community Administration. Recently both
Fort Dodge and WaKeeney State Veterans Cemeteries respectively
respective received the Stewardship and Operational Excellence
Awards for superior performance. We continue to strive for the
highest standards in honoring veterans and their dependents at
a lasting memorial to their service.
Chairman Tester, Ranking Member Moran, we would like to
extend our gratitude for the loyal support of both this
Committee and the National Cemetery Administration. This
concludes my testimony, and we welcome your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Turner appears on page 48 of
the Appendix.]
Chairman Tester. Thank you, General.
It is always good to have the VFW in front of the
Committee. Michael, you have the floor.
STATEMENT OF MICHAEL FIGLIOLI, DIRECTOR, NATIONAL VETERANS
SERVICE, VETERANS OF FOREIGN WARS OF THE UNITED STATES
Mr. Figlioli. Chairman Tester, Ranking Member Moran, and
Members of the Committee, on behalf of the men and women of the
Veterans of Foreign Wars of the United States and its
Auxiliary, thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony
with regard to burial benefits and ongoing efforts for veterans
and their families.
I am honored to have been asked to be a witness for this
hearing regarding an agency of the Department of Veterans
Affairs that I feel is often overlooked yet delivers the
highest customer service and quality. It is not often that we
are afforded the chance during a congressional hearing to focus
more on the positives of VA rather than solely on what needs to
be corrected.
The National Cemetery Administration has consistently rated
in the high 90 percentile in every American Customer
Satisfaction Index survey since 2015. It most recently achieved
a 97 percent rating in 2022, which was the highest score ever
achieved in any organization rated by ACSI. This is a
remarkable achievement and envious in any industry.
I had the honor to serve two terms as a member of the
Advisory Committee on Cemeteries and Memorials. This allowed me
to see firsthand their dedication and professionalism in
serving those who seek to be memorialized in our Nation's
shrines for their service.
The NCA, for half a century, has had the mission of
providing a fitting final resting place for those who served in
our Nation's military conflicts. More than five million souls
have been entrusted to its expert care. This includes decedents
from the Revolutionary War to our most recent conflicts in
Afghanistan, Iraq, and other places around the globe. NCA was
also entrusted with the solemn responsibility of reinterring
Air Force pilot, First Lieutenant Michael Blassie, from the
Vietnam War, who was thought to be the last unknown from any
conflict.
NCA has long been a forward-thinking agency, despite its
mission to look backward. By that I mean remembering the lives
and careers of hundreds of thousands of soldiers, sailors,
airmen, Marines, Coast Guardsmen, and now Guardians are
properly memorialized not only in acres of beautifully
landscaped grounds but in cyberspace as well.
Beyond physical memorials, the agency has embraced digital
innovation through projects like the Veterans Legacy Memorial
Project. As a subcommittee chairman for this project, I
witnessed firsthand its success in creating a public-facing
digital archive where family members, friends, and fellow
servicemembers can share memories about our veterans. Balancing
privacy and free speech concerns, the NCA implemented a review
system ensuring appropriateness and accuracy in the shared
content. The Veterans Legacy Program, initiated in 2016,
further engages students and teachers across the Nation in
discovering the historical richness within VA national
cemeteries. This program has funded 35 initiates in colleges
and universities, involving nearly 15,000 students, and
producing valuable resources such as veteran biographies,
documentary videos, and lesson plans.
While these initiatives showcase the NCA's commitment to
honoring veterans, it is crucial to raise awareness about the
agency itself. Often overshadowed by Arlington National
Cemetery, the NCA administers 155 national cemeteries, each
uniquely reflecting the communities they serve. The Veterans
Legacy Program has played a vital role in telling the history
of those cemeteries and the individuals interred with them.
Addressing challenges faced by NCA I want to highlight a
case that exemplifies effective cooperation and problem
solving. In 2018, concerns were raised about accessing the
National Cemetery Scheduling Office. Through collaboration with
the advisory committee, issues were identified, solutions were
implemented, demonstrating the NCA's dedication to maintaining
a high level of service.
As advocates for veterans, the VFW addresses concerns
raised by its members. In 2018, we responded to concerns about
inscriptions on headstones in the Southern Wisconsin Veterans
Memorial Cemetery. The issues centered around inscriptions like
``Vietnam,'' potentially misleading observers about veterans'
actual service. While emphasizing the importance of accuracy,
the VFW called for a review of the policy to ensure accurate
recognition of veterans' service.
Funding is critical to sustaining the NCA's operations and
meeting the rising costs associated with inflation. Adequate
funding ensures proper grounds upkeep, materials for new
cemeteries, and seamless burial processes for the increasing
number of veterans each year. The VFW recognizes the need for
continued support from authorizing and appropriating committees
to maintain the high standards set by NCA.
VFW advocates for improved data-sharing among VA entities,
including the NCA. Efficient communication on veteran deaths is
essential for timely and accurate processing of claims for
survivors. Investments in technology upgrades or a single IT
platform are necessary for streamlining this process and
ensuring the effectiveness of benefits programs.
In conclusion, I am proud to have been a part of the NCA
team and witness its dedication to honoring veterans. The
agency, though often viewed as a third wheel on the benefits
landscape, plays a crucial role in closing the loop in every
veteran's story of service. The men and women of NCA make a
positive difference in people's lives during the worst of times
with care and professionalism.
This concludes my testimony, and I am happy to answer any
questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Figlioli appears on page 56
of the Appendix.]
Chairman Tester. Thank you for your testimony, Michael, and
there will be questions.
I will yield my position to Senator King.
Senator King. Mr. Chairman, I really do not have any
questions except this has been an extraordinary hearing where
it has really been so positive, particularly, and I think Mr.
Quinn should feel very positive about the response that he has
gotten today. Your testimony was extraordinary about customer
service. And I just think this is one of the most successful
programs we are engaged in and we need to maintain our support
and continue our oversight. But I think in this case it is
support more than oversight.
Chairman Tester. Thank you for that observation. I think it
just proves what happens when you put a Montanan at the head of
a program. Senator Moran.
Senator Moran. Let me complain about this Committee to you.

Senator Moran. Mr. Chairman, thank you. It has been a
good--I agree with the Senator from New Hampshire--it has been
a--from Maine--I appreciate what we have heard today.
Let me just ask a couple of things, perhaps of General
Turner. You heard the testimony or the request of the Senator
from West Virginia. Is there something missing in our
cemeteries as far as shelter during the committal ceremony?
Mr. Turner. Yes, sir. Right now at two of our veteran
cemeteries we have them encased with side doors, side panels if
you will, that help protect against the weather elements, the
severe winds that we see in Kansas and the like, so when it is
cold out. Two of the cemeteries have that, sir, and they are
able to provide that kind of care and comfort for those and the
families that are there to attend those ceremonies, the
committal shelter. The other two do not have that, but that has
been built into our capital improvements program this year, and
we received the funding from our State and our State general
funds, and we are being able to go about doing that. So we are
going to be initiating, you know, the going out for bid and
then completing those projects here in the next probably 12 to
15 months, sir.
Senator Moran. I have been to all four of our State
cemeteries. It seems to me, as I recollect, there is a shelter
for burial in really all four locations, but I must be missing
something?
Mr. Turner. I apologize, sir, if I miscommunicated. We do
have the committal shelter with the roofs or with the structure
there, but two of the----
Senator Moran. Just the sides?
General Turner . Two of the sides, yes, sir,
the side doors, the side panels. And so two of them did not
have that, and now we are in the process of correcting that.
Senator Moran. The design engineers must have not
recognized that the weather does not always come from above.
Mr. Turner. Yes, sir. Exactly.
Senator Moran. I wanted to make sure that I am not missing
something on any tribal issues in Kansas. We would share with
Montana and other States significant tribal population. Are
there any issues in regard to cemeteries and tribes in our
State?
Mr. Turner. No, sir. We do not have any issues at this
time. We do not have any dedicated tribal cemeteries that we
oversee or supervise from the Kansas Commission on Veterans
Affairs, but we work closely with those groups, sort of provide
an equal support for them as well.
Senator Moran. Very good. And finally, is there anything,
General Turner, that if I knew I would be disturbed by? Is
anything going on in Kansas in regard to the topic of today's
hearing that I should be made aware of?
Mr. Turner. Sir, I do not think there is anything that kind
of rises to that threshold that should cause you great concern.
There are certainly issues that we deal with all the time in
terms of making sure that we are following the right procedures
and making sure that we follow through with attention to
detail, whether it be with ordering and establishing the grave
markers for each of these individuals, if it is the meticulous
nature in which we go about maintaining the grave markers at
the cemeteries, maintaining the grounds. I think the staff does
a tremendous job of doing that, sir. But it does not come
without its challenges, obviously. There is a 17-person staff
out there that does that work, and they do great work, sir.
Senator Moran. I was not, of course, General, suggesting
that there was anything but wanted to make sure that you had
the opportunity to inform me if there was something that you
thought would be helpful for me to know, to be of help in
solving a problem.
And just generally, the Kansas Commission on Veterans
Affairs, are staffing levels, are positions filled and
adequately staffed in Kansas, beyond just cemeteries?
Mr. Turner. Yes, sir, they are. We have received a
tremendous influx of folks that have been seeking employment
with us. We owe a lot of that to administration, the Kelly
administration, and the legislature out there with a 24/7 pay
plan with various considerations for salaries and wages that
has helped increase our staffing at each of our veterans homes.
And likewise, that is also applicable to our programs with
veteran services as well.
Senator Moran. And General, finally, again, unrelated to
the topic of the hearing today, my understanding is that our
team, including my staff here, are working with you and your
team as we try to find a path forward on a veterans home, an
additional veterans home in Kansas. Anything to report to
update me there?
Mr. Turner. Sir, we have the State dollars that represent
the 35 percent commitment of $17.2 million. It has been
appropriated to us in a line account in our budget. And we have
submitted an application with the Federal VA Construction Grant
Program to seek the other 65 percent. We are currently in one
of the priority groups, and there is a subsequent list that
will come out here in the future that will also assess where we
will fall in the future.
But, sir, we have continued with our schematic design, our
design development, so when the time comes when funds are
available we are absolutely intending to be ready to break
ground and proceed.
Senator Moran. I will work with you in hopes that we can
find an innovative way to get us to a position in which that
decision and the funding is available more rapidly than it
otherwise might be. Thank you. Thank you for your service.
Chairman Tester. Senator Blumenthal.
HON. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL,
U.S. SENATOR FROM CONNECTICUT
Senator Blumenthal. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank
all the witnesses. General, thank you for your service and Ms.
Ackerman, for yours as well in the Air Force, and your son,
Denton, who is in the Montana National Guard, thank you. I want
to, in particular, thank Veterans of Foreign Wars that play
such an important part in advocacy, but also in helping at the
State level. I have seen it myself in Connecticut, along with
other VSOs, in keeping awareness elevated about the need to
honor our veterans, not just in words but in action, health
care and all the other ways that you do, and at our places of
burial, our cemeteries.
I want to focus just really quickly on the program that
benefit State-funded cemeteries. In Connecticut we have two. A
lot of the time families really want their loved ones to be
buried close to home. Arlington is a majestic, beautiful place
but so is our State cemetery in Connecticut, in Middletown. And
the Veterans Cemetery Grant Program enables grants to be used
to establish, expand, or improve veteran cemeteries that are
owned and operated by the States.
I have looked at the list of 69 conforming requests. By the
way, one of them is from Helena, Montana, for $2 million. I
assume that is going to be funded promptly.

Chairman Tester. Don't make any assumptions.
Senator Blumenthal. None from Kansas, so far as I know.
Senator Moran. I assume that is going to be funded quickly
too.

Senator Blumenthal. But very, very seriously, these
cemeteries are really so important. Maintaining them, expanding
them, maybe each of you could comment briefly on that program.
Ms. Ackerman?
Ms. Ackerman. Yes, sir. I mean, it is the greatest honor
that we can provide our veterans and their family members, and
that $2 million expansion grant has already been awarded. It
had been submitted back in 2016, so it has been sitting on the
docket. It took us quite a few years for it to wait until it
had been actually awarded. So we have been waiting a long time
but we are going through the architect and engineer phase right
now.
The process is long. It can be frustrating for all of the
staff. There are a lot of different pieces and parts and moving
parts that have to go through. But when it is all said and
done, the National Cemetery Administration staff and the grant
program staff are absolutely fantastic to work with. And I
remember when I was new in my position I had no idea what I was
doing, and I would just pick up the phone and call the NCA
grant program staff and they were fantastic. But when you are
running out of plots in your cemetery and you need to expand,
or you just need an improvement, like we were talking about,
when you need more walls for your committal shelters, we have,
in our committal shelters in Montana, we have those walls. And
if you did not have them in Montana, you are hurting because
our winters are brutal.
And so these improvements, these grant and expansion
improvements are absolutely phenomenal. If you have ever been
through Miles City, Montana, it is flat. It is eastern Montana,
and it gets really windy and really cold. And if we did not
have that beautiful committal shelter with walls so that the
family could nestle in together in those walls it would be very
uncomfortable. Well, they would not get out of their cars is
what would happen, or they would wait until the summer and bury
them in the summer. So yes, it is a very, very, very important
program.
Thank you for asking that question, Senator.
Senator Blumenthal. Thank you. Thanks for those comments.
Very important. General?
Mr. Turner. So I have to echo Ms. Ackerman's comments. We
feel the same way, sir, and it is so vital I think to the
communities and to the families and the friends to be able to
continue to pay respects and honor. When we have these
ceremonies out in these local communities they are highly
attended. There may be 300 or 400 folks that come out to a
local community cemetery out there to pay respects and honor
their citizens who have served our Nation, take great pride in
that. At all hours of the day and night, we know that we have
visitors that come in solitude, and sometimes out there in the
day will come out and spend time and visit with their loved
ones.
So I think it is a very critical need to have these in the
local communities where these folks lived and were raised and
then left to go serve their country and then returned home to,
rather than having to travel great distances to do that. So it
has been really a great thing for us.
Senator Blumenthal. Thank you. Sir?
Mr. Figlioli. Yes, thank you, Senator. Yes, VFW definitely
supports the State Cemetery Grant Program. Because of
geographic areas--I am originally from Massachusetts so near
your home State--you know, Cape Cod Bourne is one of the
largest national cemeteries, but then the next closest
cemetery, that is the only one. The next one is out in the
middle of the State, the State cemetery in Worcester. So it
provides that option because they are just as highly maintained
as national cemeteries, but it also gives you that option. If
there is no room at Bourne, or it is too far to travel, then
you have the State cemetery option because it is just as
close--same standards, same training as VA. And VFW is happy to
continue to advocate for support for that program, and as a
grassroots organization would be happy to partner with you at
the State level as well and encourage our Department-level
staff and members to work with your office as well and try to
get that line moving and that funding, besides Kansas and
Montana.
Senator Blumenthal. Thank you very much. Thank you all for
your service.
Chairman Tester. Thank you, Senator Blumenthal. And I want
to echo Senator Blumenthal's remarks about the VFW. You guys
have a class organization, and we appreciate you being in front
of the Committee today.
My first question has to do with Kelly Ackerman. Administer
Ackerman, recently we heard about an issue with the First
Special Service Force medallions at the cemetery in Fort
Harrison. What I need you to do is explain the issue and then
tell me how it was resolved.
Ms. Ackerman. Thank you, Senator. The issue was it was
noticed that the First Special Service Force medallions, there
were actually 11 of them at the time, they were noticed that
they were on the headstones of the First Special Service Force
headstones at Fort Harrison, Montana.
Chairman Tester. Yep.
Ms. Ackerman. When they were noticed it was pointed out to
us that it was against regulations to have medallions on
headstones. These medallions have been on these headstones
since the '80s, because Fort Harrison in Montana is the
birthplace of the First Special Service Force. We hesitated on
taking these medallions off because it was the birthplace, but
we were directed to do this, and so we took them off. The
families were not happy, but, you know, as I was directed to do
that I directed my staff to take the medallions off.
I visited with National Cemetery Administration staff and I
requested for a special exception to be made to be able to keep
these medallions on because of the special situation, and I was
granted that exception. So now there is a memorandum of
agreement in place, going through legal review, and so these
medallions will be able to be reinstalled, replaced on these
headstones. Some of the headstones will need to be replaced
because of them did damage by taking them off, removing them
off of the headstones.
Chairman Tester. Well, thank you for your work on this
issue.
I want to talk about the grant funding, and I want to talk
about the standards that are associated with the grant funding.
And this is for you and the general, Kelly. What are some of
the challenges that States have in meeting the National Shrine
standards, or are there challenges?
Ms. Ackerman. Yes, sir, there are challenges. One of the
challenges with the--there is an inspectable item on the
National Shrine standard is setting headstones in the
wintertime. You would not think that would be an issue for most
States because it is not, but in the wintertime we cannot set--
well, we can set a headstone in the wintertime but then we have
to reset them all again in the spring. And with our staffing,
you know----
Chairman Tester. It makes a difference.
Ms. Ackerman . The General does not have any
more staffing than we do. It makes it very challenging. So we
do not set headstones in the winter, so that is a challenge.
But the other challenges that we have are just with our
staffing shortages. That is about the only challenge that we
have with National Shrine standards. With the general upkeep of
the grounds themselves, we do not have any challenges.
Chairman Tester. Okay. General, would you like to respond
to that?
Mr. Turner. Yes, sir. Thank you. Probably the greatest
challenge is similar to what Ms. Ackerman had stated in terms
of the staffing and being able to meet all the requirements. I
will tell you that our staff take great pride in doing that,
and we recognize the challenge, and the folks that are
appreciated. They go about that by really teaming
collaboratively. They will move between cemeteries as needed,
and they will surge in different areas where needed, to work
together to be able to meet the requirements, to work on
setting the grave markers, to making sure that it is all being
done to standard.
The training issue I addressed, I think, in the opening
comments, are again, with such a staff that does not have much
depth it makes it very difficult sometimes to send somebody
away. You cannot always anticipate when there is going to be a
funeral service, when you are going to provide honors of this
nature. So to let somebody go and to do that when you only have
two equipment operators at a location, and many of these
operations require two and three people to do, then so what we
have done alternatively is to seek opportunities where we can
come together, and we partner with the NCA and those national
cemeteries within our State to be able to achieve that.
Chairman Tester. This is a question for you, Mr. Figlioli.
NCA offers a number of burial benefits. Most importantly they
allow burial in a veteran cemetery with a promise to maintain
that final resting place into perpetuity. Mr. Figlioli, how do
your members feel NCA is doing with maintaining veteran
cemeteries?
Mr. Figlioli. Thank you. I think overall they are satisfied
as they seek out through pre-need and other methods to secure
that benefit to be buried in the national cemetery. I do not
think we have gotten very many complaints at the Washington,
DC, headquarters about that particular benefit. I think a lot
of our members are aware that it is a benefit. I think they
take advantage of it. And as I said, if the NCA portion is not
necessarily available then I think, yes, they are also inclined
to look at a State cemetery as well.
And we are happy to continue to push that word out about
access to those burial benefits, whether that is through pre-
need, through our social media, through talking to each other.
You know, we heard earlier that it is kind of an underused
benefit in such a way. I think we are aware because we work in
that space. But we are definitely happy to continue to talk
about the good things NCA does and the benefits of seeking to
be memorialized in a national cemetery.
Chairman Tester. Thank you. Do you have anything? Okay.
A couple of things here. I would ask unanimous consent that
my opening statement be a part of the record.
Senator Moran. No objection.
Chairman Tester. If no objection we can get them as a part
of the record. Thank you for that.
[The opening statement of Chairman Tester appears on page
33 of the Appendix.]
Chairman Tester. I want to thank our witnesses for their
participation in today's hearing.
On a personal note, I just want to say that when I was a
teenager I was asked to play Taps by the VFW for funerals that
were held in my hometown. That may be the highest honor I have
ever had in my life. I truly got to play Taps for some
incredible people over my life, Danny Inouye being one, and a
guy by the name of Lindy Ray being another, who I played for
last August, who was the guy that asked me to be the bugler for
the VFW.
I just want to say that the work that NCA does, the work
that these small communities do, the work that the VFW chapters
do, providing honor guide and buglers, is something that we
ought to continue to support and encourage and make sure that
it continues to happen.
With that I would just say we will keep the record open for
a week, and we are adjourned.

A P P E N D I X
Opening Statement
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT
Prepared Statements
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT
Questions for the Record
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT
Submission for the Record
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT