IMPLEMENTATION OF THE
U.S. ANTI-CORRUPTION STRATEGY
----------
THURSDAY, MARCH 21, 2024
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Foreign Relations,
Washington, DC
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:30 a.m., in
room SD-419, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Benjamin L.
Cardin, chairman of the committee, presiding.
Present: Senators Cardin , Shaheen, Coons,
Murphy, Kaine, Booker, Van Hollen, Risch, Ricketts, Young, and
Cruz.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BENJAMIN L. CARDIN,
U.S. SENATOR FROM MARYLAND
The Chairman. The Senate Foreign Relations Committee will
come to order. I want to welcome our guests, and this hearing
deals with the implementation of the U.S. anti-corruption
policies.
Corruption is a cancer. It exists in every country and
every society. It undermines the rule of law and good
governance. It threatens the safety and security of people
everywhere. It empowers dictators and authoritarians,
terrorists and criminals, all over the world.
From Putin's $1.3 billion-dollar Russian palace with a wine
cave, an indoor hockey rink, and golden toilet brushes--that is
pretty good for a career public servant--this has been
documented by Alexei Navalny's anti-corruption foundation. To
Xi Jinping's so-called anti-corruption purge of nearly 5
million people to strengthen his hold on China. To Hungary,
Mexico, Liberia, Indonesia, no country is immune.
Our nation's Founding Fathers realized the threat of
foreign influence. They included the Foreign Emoluments Clause
in our Constitution to prevent foreign governments from
enriching those who serve in the highest office in our country.
Our Founding Fathers understood that the temptation to take
shortcuts is part of human nature.
Today we must recognize that there will always be people in
positions of power who will try to use their status to enrich
themselves. The question is how can governments address this?
How do we prosecute it? How do we stop it? How do we mitigate
it?
Finding the answers to these questions is one of the keys
to global peace and stability. I have long championed the fight
against corruption here at home and abroad. In consultation
with the State Department and USAID, Congress recently enacted
my Combatting Global Corruption Act. It requires the State
Department publish a public record on countries making progress
against corruption to give them a pat on the back and encourage
more to do the same.
Countries that are failing to make progress against
corruption will be part of a report to Congress. It also asks
administrations evaluate whether any foreign person in
countries on the classified list should be sanctioned under the
Global Magnitsky Human Rights Accountability Act, which was
made permanent when it was reauthorized in 2022.
I want to underscore that the law asks the State Department
to also present us with a budget for implementing this report
each year, and moving forward. These are important tools in a
long-term fight against corruption, a fight that I am pleased
to say the Biden administration understands and has taken on
with great gusto. In June of 2021, the Administration published
a national security memorandum establishing the fight against
corruption as a core United States national security interest.
It says as clear as can be that corruption threatens our
``national security, economic equity, global anti-poverty and
development efforts, and democracy itself.'' Whether conducting
oversight of aid in Ukraine, where the Administration has three
inspectors general at work, or holding corrupt officials
accountable as the Administration has done with over 80 visa
restrictions and 61 designations of individuals under the
Global Magnitsky law.
There is still more that we need to do. United States
officials doing the people's business must set an example by
maintaining the highest degree of integrity, which is why we
also passed an amendment last year that bars senior State
Department officials from lobbying for foreign governments for
at least 3 years after they conclude their government service,
and bars Secretaries of State and their deputies from lobbying
for foreign governments for life.
These are the kind of concrete steps we take that we think
can provide real-world results and show a model program for
other nations to follow.
I mentioned Russia at the start of my remarks and I want to
ask to include in the record a statement prepared for today's
hearing by Maria Pevchikh. She is the chair of the board of
directors of the anti-corruption foundation that was founded by
Alexei Navalny. It is the source of some of the best
information on corruption in Putin's Russia. Without objection,
it will be included in our record.
[Editor's note.--The information referred to above was not
available at time of print.]
The Chairman. I look forward to hearing from our witnesses
and to see what is working around the world, what we could do
more, and what additional steps you need from Congress, and how
we can deal with this national security core concern in
fighting corruption.
With that, let me turn it over to Senator Risch.
STATEMENT OF HON. JAMES E. RISCH,
U.S. SENATOR FROM IDAHO
Senator Risch. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Important
hearing, no doubt.
Corruption is an issue that undermines the health, safety,
security, and economic prosperity of billions of people around
the globe. It is not just an issue of good governance and
transparency. Eliminating it is fundamental to the rule of law.
It is a big, big issue and does not get nearly the attention
that it deserves.
Strategic corruption, the weaponization of corrupt
practices for geopolitical gain, is a key vehicle for Russian
and Chinese malign influence. It is in our interest to identify
international kleptocrats and crooks and hold them accountable.
We have a number of tools for doing this, including the
Global Magnitsky Act. However, I am concerned about the
potential misuse of some of these authorities, particularly the
7031(c) authority. I led a letter last month expressing concern
of its misuse in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Russia keeps its war machine running by using corruption to
evade sanctions. This evasion allows it to keep its economy
alive and its military supply chains intact.
For China, bribes and under-the-table deals are key to its
empire-building. In fact, corruption is China's largest export.
China-linked criminal groups are rampant in the Pacific
Islands, and those partners are asking for U.S. support on
anti-corruption initiatives to tackle this issue. Chinese firms
are also notorious for their corrupt behavior across Africa and
in any nation where they are doing large-scale infrastructure
projects.
The key question remains, how does the President's anti-
corruption strategy address the serious problem of strategic
corruption from China, Russia, and other adversaries? We are
looking forward to hearing answers to those today at the
hearing.
With China, we should expose high-level corruption by
Chinese officials and demonstrate the real motives behind
China's so-called ``partnerships'' abroad. We must hold these
officials accountable and support our partners in doing the
same.
We should also target China's illicit financing with our
partners. I would like to know how China's efforts to
sanctions-proof its economy and decouple from the U.S. are
facilitating illicit financial flows globally, and particularly
in Hong Kong.
With Russia, we must work with groups like Alexei Navalny's
Anti-Corruption Fund to map, expose, and sanction those who are
stealing from the Russian people and working to undermine
Ukraine. We must also work more closely with Russia's neighbors
to help them unwind the corrupt networks that both smuggle in
sanctioned goods and undermine local governance.
In Africa, we must address endemic corruption. If we hope
to achieve sustainable progress in development, democracy, and
security, this must be done.
For instance, the ``stability'' of DRC's democracy is
crucial for securing vital mineral supply chains and opposing
China's influence. Corruption in the DRC significantly hinders
these interests and their impact on U.S. national security. The
Biden administration's attempts to combat corruption,
particularly in the context of PGII's investments, are notably
inadequate.
Another example is Somalia. Transparency International
consistently ranks it among the most corrupt countries. This
corruption undermines U.S. efforts to combat the terrorism
group al-Shabaab. For counterterrorism strategies to be
effective, the U.S. must intensify its efforts to address
corruption, including holding Somalia's Government more
accountable.
In Syria, the Assad regime remains among the most corrupt
on the planet. It continues to build luxury properties on the
land of murdered Syrians, and Assad's narco-empire fuels
continued atrocities against the Syrian people. My bill, the
Assad Anti-Normalization Act, which overwhelmingly passed the
House, awaits committee action and is a key tool to hold Assad
accountable. I hope as we move forward on the agenda for the
coming work period, we can get that bill on.
At home, weak foreign agent laws and post-employment
restrictions exacerbate corruption. The Chairman and I passed a
provision in State authorization a couple years ago to
strengthen post-employment rules for the State Department, but
more work needs to be done across the Federal Government.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses on all of
these issues. These are important issues.
With that, I turn it back to the chairman.
The Chairman. I want to thank Senator Risch for his opening
comments and his commitment in fighting corruption.
I will now introduce our two witnesses. I thank them both
for being here. Your entire statements will be made part of the
record, and we ask that you summarize in about 5 minutes so
that we can have a discussion among the members of the
Committee.
Mr. Richard Nephew, who currently serves as the Department
of State's Coordinator on Global Anti-Corruption is also the
President of the Conference of State Parties to the United
Nations Convention Against Corruption. Before returning to
public service, Mr. Nephew was a Senior Research Scholar at
Columbia University Center on Global Energy Policy. He also
served as the Deputy Special Envoy for Iran, Principal Deputy
Coordinator for Sanctions Policy, and Director for Iran on
National Security Staff. He has also served in the Department's
Bureau of International Security and Nonproliferation as well
as in the Office of Nonproliferation and International Security
at the Department of Energy.
Shannon Green, welcome, is the Assistant to the
Administrator of the Bureau for Democracy, Human Rights, and
Governance. In this role she leads USAID's efforts to
invigorate democracy, enhance human rights and justice, and
bolster governance that advances the public interest and
delivers inclusive development.
Ms. Green was previously the Senior Advisor to the
Administrator and Executive Director of the Anti-Corruption
Task Force which she led, USAID's historic elevation of anti-
corruption and aligned the agency's policies, programming, and
resources to counter corruption at a global scale.
We welcome both of you. We will start with Mr. Nephew.
STATEMENT OF RICHARD NEPHEW, COORDINATOR, GLOBAL ANTI-
CORRUPTION, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE, WASHINGTON, DC
Mr. Nephew. Great. Thank you very much. Chairman Cardin,
Ranking Member Risch, members of the Committee, thank you for
holding this hearing. I am honored to testify about how the
State Department is implementing the U.S. strategy on
countering corruption.
This is the first time the United States has ever had such
a strategy, and it reflects the President's judgment that
corruption represents a national security threat to the United
States and our partners, that must be countered with an
approach that enlists everyone in government.
While the strategy is a guiding document for the executive
branch, we recognize the key role that Congress plays in
fighting corruption, and that we can achieve so much more when
we work in partnership.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to make particular note of the
Combating Global Corruption Act, which as you mentioned you
have been championing for many years. I am confident that the
final legislation will prove very useful to the entire
government in our common efforts to fight corruption. In fact,
I have already started raising this act with our embassies and
partners abroad, and we are working very hard to develop and
draft the methodology report required by the end of the year. I
look forward to consultations with your team concerning the
methodology, and perhaps most important, how we can use the
eventual reports that will be produced to advance our common
anti-corruption agenda around the world.
While the United States has long been a leader in anti-
corruption policy and practice, the strategy demonstrates we
are looking for ways to improve our work. The strategy gives us
the tools to assess gaps in our activities and assistance and
to integrate the fight against corruption across the
government.
The success of any strategy lies in its implementation and
accountability for results. To that end, the State Department
released our public implementation plan in September 2023, to
outline ongoing and planned work under the strategy's five
pillars.
My written testimony goes into the pillars of the strategy
in some detail so I will not repeat those points here. Instead,
let me ask for the entirety of my written testimony to be
entered into the record and highlight just three points.
First, my job title involves the word ``coordinator,'' and
that is what I do, work with other parts of the State
Department, U.S. Government, and international community to
identify corruption challenges and strategies to confront them.
To my mind, this is most effectively done by engaging with the
specific challenges facing a country. I have yet to see two
countries experiencing the same corruption challenges or for
which there are identical solutions. Differences in history,
economics, culture, international relations, and development
status all have a bearing on how corruption manifests and how
we should respond.
Second, doing this right requires resources, including
foreign assistance, but not solely foreign assistance. We seek
to use all of our resources in this work, including our
leadership with multilateral institutions, accountability tools
like visa restrictions and sanctions, and direct diplomacy with
countries to identify problems and find solutions.
Fighting modern corruption also requires information and
analysis, including learning from all available sources about
how corrupt actors operate and where. For this reason, we seek
out to engage civil society, investigative journalists, the
private sector and foreign governments regularly. We are trying
to improve the flow of information through not only our
government, but also within and among our international
partners. Corrupt actors use their networks, so we need better
ones. We are working to support an inclusive community of anti-
corruption champions around the world to do just that.
Last, doing this work also requires mainstreaming anti-
corruption into our foreign policy, because the problems that
corruption creates or entrenches touch on every part of our
international interests. Corruption saps economic growth,
hinders developments, destabilizes governments, undermines
democracy, fuels transnational crime, contributes to irregular
migration, and foments global instability and insecurity.
Fighting corruption is, therefore, not a nice-to-have, but
rather an essential part of our work to preserve, sustain, and
enrich democratic governance around the world as well as our
work to address these specific direct national security
challenges.
Fighting corruption is also not completely altruistic.
Strengthening our international partners and their ability to
confront and counter corruption certainly does help them.
Fighting corruption abroad also helps us here at home, in many
direct ways. Our anti-corruption work levels the playing field
for American workers and businesses trying to operate abroad
the right way. It protects the homeland from corrosive effects
of proceeds of corruption, and it denies bad actors the
opportunities they need to threaten or damage U.S. interests.
The Department is committed to implementing the U.S.
Strategy on Countering Corruption using every tool available.
We are also committed to working with Congress to identify
emerging challenges and ways to address them. I would like to
highlight that the Administration has offered a set of
legislative proposals that would help us in our work to counter
corruption. This includes a proposal from the State Department
to extend Section 7031(c) to allow us to publicly designate
private enablers of corruption. I would be happy to discuss
this in more detail in the Q&A.
Mr. Chairman, I am deeply proud of the Department's efforts
to do so holistically, particularly those to date in my tenure
as Coordinator. I am also grateful for this Committee's
bipartisan commitment to this issue, and I look forward to
answering your questions. Thank you.

Prepared Statement of Mr. Richard Nephew
Chairman Cardin, Ranking Member Risch, members of the Committee,
thank you for holding this hearing. I am honored to testify about how
the State Department is implementing the U.S. Strategy on Countering
Corruption.
While the Strategy is a guiding document for the executive branch,
we recognize the key role Congress plays in fighting corruption. The
Department appreciates your partnership, showcased recently in our
consultations concerning the Combating Global Corruption Act that was
passed last year. I am confident that the final legislation will prove
useful to the entire government in our common efforts to fight
corruption, and I've already started engaging with our posts and
international partners, who are tracking the legislation with interest.
Corruption saps economic growth, hinders development, destabilizes
governments, undermines democracy, fuels transnational crime,
contributes to irregular migration, and foments global instability and
insecurity. Promoting integrity and accountability is foundational to
advancing other foreign policy objectives, including supporting
democratic renewal, advancing a foreign policy that benefits all
Americans, leveling the playing field for American workers and
businesses, and protecting U.S. national security. Fighting corruption
internationally also protects the homeland from the corrosive effects
of proceeds of corruption.
Tackling corruption benefits our international partners, too.
Countering corruption creates pathways for fair and equitable access to
resources and opportunities, impedes the endeavors of criminals and
terrorists, and ensures our international partners' stability,
sovereignty, and security.
While the United States has long been a leader in anti-corruption
policy and practice, the Strategy demonstrates that we can find ways to
improve our work. The Strategy gives us the tools to assess gaps in our
activities and assistance, and to integrate the fight against
corruption across the government.
The success of any strategy lies in its implementation and
accountability for results. To that end, the State Department released
our public implementation plan in September 2023 to outline ongoing and
planned work under the Strategy's five pillars. I would like to briefly
summarize those efforts.
First, we are better modernizing, coordinating, and resourcing our
work. That includes making sure we have the teams and people needed to
elevate this work; improving our analysis and understanding of how
corruption manifests and effective strategies to address it, informed
by the intelligence community and non-governmental experts; and
ensuring that our embassies have access to the information they need to
operate most effectively. We are building structures to enhance
internal collaboration and to ensure that anti-corruption
considerations are incorporated into senior decision-making. In fact,
that is the purpose of my office, which has since its inception in 2022
deepened integration of anti-corruption efforts at the Department and
engaged in frank conversations directly with civil society, the private
sector, and foreign governments.
Second, we are working with partners across the interagency to curb
illicit finance, including by strengthening international frameworks to
prevent and detect money laundering as well as improving international
capacity to implement the Financial Action Task Force recommendations.
We also support international partner capacities on asset recovery and
return.
Third, we promote accountability for corrupt actors. We are
engaging with foreign governments to bolster their mechanisms for
pursuing accountability. When corrupt actors operate with impunity, we
leverage tools such as sanctions and visa restrictions to deny safe
haven to them and the proceeds of their crimes, disrupting their
activities and protecting the U.S. financial system from corrosive
inflows of proceeds of corruption. We are also taking action to disrupt
networks that enable corrupt actors. For example, in December 2023,
President Biden signed a presidential proclamation to expand the
Secretary's visa restriction authorities to cover enablers of
corruption and their family members, sending a strong message that the
United States will not shy away from imposing consequences on those who
engage in and facilitate corruption. The Department submitted a
proposal to expand our authorities under Section 7031(c) of the State
Appropriation to grant us the discretionary authority to publicly
designate these enablers of corruption; I appreciate your consideration
of this request and would be happy to discuss any questions. Likewise,
we are committed to engaging and supporting non-governmental actors
across civil society, media, and the private sector to expose
corruption and pursue accountability.
Fourth, we are driving on these issues in multilateral fora. We
promote implementation of treaty obligations and global standards to
ensure that they are translated into action. When countries do not live
up to their obligations, we raise it with them, and sometimes raise it
publicly. We are committed to enhancing our engagement with multi-
stakeholder initiatives like the Open Government Partnership, and we
are continuing to elevate anti-corruption as a policy priority in other
global and regional multilateral bodies. This past December, the United
States became President of the UN Convention against Corruption
Conference of the States Parties. Taking on this leadership role
enables us to advance U.S. anti-corruption priorities, like championing
the role of civil society, pushing for strong measures to promote
accountability, and promoting law enforcement cooperation on asset
recovery.
The fifth and final pillar of the Strategy addresses improving
diplomatic engagement and delivering impactful foreign assistance
resources to advance our policy goals. Consistent with prior fiscal
years, the FY2025 Presidential Budget Request reflects the
Administration's ongoing prioritization of anti-corruption investments
to shore up institutional capacity gaps and legislative and policy
points of vulnerability. We are raising corruption challenges with
foreign governments and seeking out partnerships through our diplomatic
engagement. My team convenes colleagues from across the interagency,
both here in Washington and abroad, to discuss the corruption we're
observing, identify concrete near-term objectives for mitigating it,
and articulate plans to achieve these goals using the range of tools
available to us.
The Department's foreign assistance in the anti-corruption space
takes on a variety of forms. For example, our programs are training and
supporting government actors on a range of anti-corruption functions,
such as improving public financial management, bolstering anti-
corruption institutions, and strengthening prosecutors and judiciaries
to enhance oversight and accountability. We also provide support for
investigative journalists and civil society to identify and expose
corruption, advocate for increased accountability for corrupt actors,
and advance transparency and anti-corruption reforms. We engage the
private sector to identify where market-driven reforms align with our
shared anti-corruption objectives.
Across our programming and policy engagement, it is clear that
progress requires a bundle of reforms and persistent, collective
efforts to achieve results, informed by an understanding of what works
in particular contexts and an adaptive approach. The Department is
committed to implementing the U.S. Strategy on Countering Corruption
using every tool available. We are also committed to working with
Congress to identify emerging challenges and ways to address them. I am
deeply proud of the Department's efforts to do so holistically,
particularly those to date in my tenure as Coordinator. I am also
grateful for this Committee's bipartisan commitment to this issue. I
look forward to answering your questions.
The Chairman. Thank you for your testimony. Ms. Green.
STATEMENT OF SHANNON GREEN, ASSISTANT TO THE ADMINISTRATOR,
BUREAU FOR DEMOCRACY, HUMAN RIGHTS, AND GOVERNANCE, U.S. AGENCY
FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT, WASHINGTON, DC
Ms. Green. Thank you. Chairman Cardin, Ranking Member
Risch, and distinguished members of the Committee, thank you
for your leadership on fighting corruption and the opportunity
to be here today.
As this Committee knows, corruption is a threat to U.S.
national security as well as USAID's mission to advance a free,
peaceful, and prosperous world. We cannot achieve these
objectives without addressing pervasive and systemic
corruption. This year, corruption's drag on democracy is
especially salient, given that more than 60 countries will hold
elections. When candidates can be bankrolled by foreign corrupt
interests and democratic institutions can be captured by
kleptocrats, citizens lose faith in their governments and
increasingly in democracy itself.
Corruption also threatens development progress across all
sectors. When public officials use their positions of power to
extort payment for basic services like clean drinking water or
access to vaccines, citizens suffer dire, sometimes fatal,
consequences. Given the stakes for both development and
democracy, tackling corruption has been vaulted to the top of
USAID's agenda. Both the President and Congress recognize the
important moment we are in as evidenced by last year's
Combating Global Corruption Act.
What I was hoping to do here today is share the bold
actions we are taking at USAID to implement the U.S. Strategy
on Countering Corruption.
First, the Administrator and agency leaders, myself
included, consistently and pointedly raise concerns about
corruption with partner governments and press them to take
action. In tandem with our interagency partners, USAID is
leveraging multilateral fora to advance anti-corruption policy
reforms, like the effective use of beneficial ownership data
and integrity in public procurement.
Second, we have overhauled our approach to foreign
assistance. As outlined in our landmark Anti-Corruption Policy,
the first of its kind for USAID, USAID has created new
capabilities to confront 21st century corruption challenges.
These capabilities include building country resilience to
transnational corruption, grand corruption, and kleptocracy. We
now have programs in place to help partner governments close
financial, legal, and regulatory loopholes, detect dirty money,
follow ill-gotten gains across borders, and ultimately hold
corrupt actors accountable.
In Paraguay, USAID is training judges and prosecutors with
an emphasis on criminal organizations and transnational
corruption, while engaging the private sector and civil society
in the investigation and oversight of corruption cases.
Expanding investigative journalism across borders, and
enhancing protection. We are fostering regional networks of
journalists to expose corruption, as in Latin America and the
Caribbean, where our partners uncovered $36.6 billion in
mismanaged public funding. Knowing the risks these journalists
face, USAID is ramping up its support to frontline anti-
corruption champions, including through Reporters Shield, an
innovative legal assistance program that has already enrolled
25 media outlets.
Responding to changing needs and windows of opportunity.
USAID is providing timely assistance to seize opportunities for
anti-corruption reform, knowing how fleeting they can be. At a
pivotal time in Zambia's fight against corruption, for
instance, we are bolstering Zambian anti-corruption
institutions, processes, and policies that were weakened under
the prior government.
Finally, countering corruption across sectors. Effectively
fighting corruption requires us to tackle it from all angles
and all sectors. Our global health colleagues are partnering
with Ministries of Health in nine sub-Saharan African countries
to detect falsified, counterfeit, and illicitly traded
medicines, ensuring that quality, lifesaving medicines get into
the hands of those who need them the most.
Third, USAID is enhancing its partnerships. In 2021, we
launched USAID's 12th Grand Challenge, inviting problem-solvers
from around the world to offer their best ideas on countering
transnational corruption. The most recent activity under the
Grand Challenge, Doing Business with Integrity, will make
awards to entities demonstrating how anti-corruption efforts
can be good for business.
In sum, USAID is fully invested in the U.S. Government's
anti-corruption agenda. We are proud of the strides we have
made.
Chairman Cardin, Ranking Member Risch, thank you for
holding this hearing on implementation of the U.S. strategy. I
look forward to your questions.

Prepared Statement of Ms. Shannon Green
Chairman Cardin, Ranking Member Risch, and distinguished Members of
the Committee, thank you for your leadership on fighting corruption and
the opportunity to be here today. As this Committee knows well,
corruption is a direct threat to U.S. national security and global
peace and prosperity, as well as USAID's mission to promote and
demonstrate democratic values abroad and advance a free, peaceful, and
prosperous world.
We cannot achieve these objectives without addressing the root
causes of poor governance, including pervasive and systemic corruption.
Corruption is frequently cited as the primary driver of discontent with
democratic systems. In global surveys, respondents often list
corruption amongst the top challenges facing their country.
This year, corruption's drag on democracy is especially salient.
Many have dubbed 2024 ``the year of elections,'' as more than 60
countries--estimated to represent close to half the world's population
and over 50 percent of global GDP--will hold elections. When candidates
can be bankrolled by foreign corrupt interests and democratic
institutions can be captured by kleptocrats, citizens lose faith in
their governments--and increasingly in democracy itself.
Corruption also threatens the aim of sustainable, inclusive, and
locally-led development across all sectors, which is why Administrator
Power calls corruption ``development in reverse.'' USAID recognizes
that we can no longer address corruption in a silo, or focus solely on
administrative corruption, when it is so closely interlinked with other
sustainable development goals. When public officials use their
positions of power to extort and demand payment for basic services--
like clean drinking water or access to vaccines--citizens suffer dire,
sometimes fatal consequences. And how can we achieve sustainable
economic growth when 46 percent of companies surveyed in 2022 reported
experiencing corruption, fraud, or other economic crimes in the last 2
years? \1\ Or ensure fair and safe labor conditions when, as noted in
the U.S. Strategy on Countering Corruption, human traffickers are among
those that benefit most from environments with endemic corruption?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ PwC, PwC's Global Economic Crime and Fraud Survey 2022, https:/
/www.pwc.com/gx/en/forensics/gecsm-2022/pdf/PwC%E2%80%99s-Global-
Economic-Crime-and-Fraud-Survey-2022.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Given the stakes for both democracy and development, tackling
corruption has been vaulted to the top of our agenda.
Both the President and Congress recognize the important moment we
are in, as evidenced by last year's Combating Global Corruption Act,
enacted as part of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal
Year 2024. This builds on the bold action we are taking to implement
the U.S. Strategy on Countering Corruption and to cultivate
partnerships across the Federal Government.
In addition to elevating the issue, USAID is transforming how it
fights corruption.
USAID is conveying the importance of countering corruption at the
highest levels with our partner countries. The Administrator
consistently and pointedly raises concerns about corruption in her
engagements with heads of state and other senior officials. Agency
leaders--myself included, as head of USAID's new Democracy, Human
Rights, and Governance Bureau--amplify this message, press government
officials to take action, offer assistance when needed, and demonstrate
solidarity with anti-corruption champions who are advocating for reform
against great odds.
Working across USAID and the interagency, and with our partners, we
are promoting anti-corruption measures like the effective use of
beneficial ownership data and integrity in public procurement and
addressing the enablers of corruption. USAID and the Department of
State have been co-leading a multi-stakeholder platform, together with
the Brookings Institution and the Open Government Partnership, to
accelerate uptake of these priority fiscal transparency and integrity
reforms in order to address vulnerabilities in the international
financial system that allow corrupt actors to hide, launder, and
transfer their ill-gotten gains around the world. We are also aiming to
accelerate this work through our programs.
Corruption has significantly evolved in recent decades to become a
globalized, networked, and pernicious problem, which is why we have
pivoted as an Agency--as codified in USAID's first ever Anti-Corruption
Policy--to confront transnational corruption, grand corruption, and
kleptocracy. USAID's approach to fighting corruption is multi-pronged,
cross-sectoral, politically informed, and locally led, and focuses on
constraining opportunities for corruption, raising the costs of
corruption, and incentivizing integrity.
Over the past 3 years, USAID has overhauled its approach to anti-
corruption and created new capabilities to address both long-standing
and emerging threats and opportunities:
The capability to build country resilience to transnational
corruption, grand corruption, and kleptocracy. We now have
programs in place that allow us to strengthen the systems and
actors needed to close loopholes, detect dirty money, follow
ill-gotten gains across borders, and ultimately hold corrupt
actors accountable. For example, we are enhancing the capacity
of key states in Eastern Europe to resist and respond to
Kremlin-linked efforts to use strategic corruption and illicit
finance to manipulate their domestic political processes and
discourse.
The capability to invest in and expand investigative
journalism networks to root out corruption, including across
borders. In Latin America and the Caribbean, a recent regional
investigative journalism initiative supported by USAID and the
Department of State produced over 200 high impact investigative
pieces. This work uncovered more than $36.6 billion in
mismanaged public funding, led to arrests, investigations, and
legal and policy reforms, and fostered a robust network of
journalists that continues to protect public resources from
graft. In North Macedonia, USAID created two interconnected
programs that bring together anti-corruption champions across
sectors--one that supports government reform while another that
ensures civil society and media watchdogs have input into
reforms and provide oversight. Through these integrated
programs, civil society oversight and media coverage lead to
concrete action. For example, as the media uncovered corruption
in the construction sector, their stories motivated specific
government reforms in that sector. Two months into
implementation of the USAID-supported Asia Investigative
Reporting Network, investigative journalists and media outlets
are already strengthening collaboration across Southeast Asia.
The capability to combat legal harassment meant to silence
investigative journalists and activists. Reporters Shield, an
innovative membership-based legal assistance program, has
already received applications from more than 45 countries and,
so far, selected 25 member organizations. Among selected
organizations are outlets from the Republika Srpska entity of
Bosnia-Herzegovina, where, last year, the National Assembly re-
criminalized defamation, putting journalists and human rights
defenders at risk for expressing their right to freedom of
expression. Cognizant of the many dangers brave activists,
reformers, and journalists face, USAID is ramping up its
support to and protection of these frontline actors.
The capability to be agile and responsive to changing needs
and windows of opportunity. USAID is focused on providing
timely and targeted assistance to seize opportunities for anti-
corruption reform or stanch backsliding when it begins. At a
pivotal time in Zambia's fight against corruption, for
instance, we are bolstering Zambian anti-corruption
institutions, processes, and policies that were purposely
weakened under the prior government. This includes zeroing in
on beneficial ownership, asset disclosure, civil society
oversight, and rule of law reforms, especially in the health
and extractives sectors. These efforts are necessary so that
the Hichilema Administration can deliver on its campaign
promises to turn the page on corruption and ensure that this
window of opportunity in Zambia is not squandered. Beyond
Zambia and more generally, through the Anti-Corruption Response
Fund, USAID has supported efforts to prevent and detect
corruption in licensing and procurement related to natural
resources, strengthen central bank and supreme audit
institution functions, and implement conflict of interest laws
when windows of opportunity open for anti-corruption action.
The enhanced capability to hold corrupt actors accountable.
Across multiple countries, USAID is investing in programs that
strengthen the capacity of executive, legislative, and judicial
bodies and civil society to hold corrupt actors accountable and
conduct effective oversight. For example, USAID and the
Department of State have implemented activities to strengthen
the Government of Liberia's capacity to investigate
pharmaceutical crime. USAID is also mobilizing citizens to
demand improvements in the pharmaceutical supply chain through
public awareness campaigns and supporting civil society
monitoring of medical supply distribution, while the Department
of State trains Liberian justice sector officials to hold
corrupt actors accountable--a continued challenge. In Paraguay,
USAID is training judges and prosecutors with a new emphasis on
criminal organizations and transnational corruption, engaging
with the private sector and civil society to increase their
collaboration in the investigation and oversight of corruption
cases.
The enhanced capability to counter corruption across
sectors. Effectively elevating the fight against corruption
requires us to tackle the problem from multiple angles and
across all sectors. Deepening and accelerating integration of
anti-corruption across sectors is central to USAID's anti-
corruption agenda. Our Global Health colleagues, for example,
are applying an anti-corruption lens to programming in a sector
where, globally, corruption drives an estimated loss of $500
billion per year. USAID has provided technical assistance to
regulatory authorities in the Ministries of Health in nine sub-
Saharan African countries that work to detect falsified,
counterfeit and illicitly traded medicines--ensuring that
quality, life-saving medicines get into the hands of those who
most need them, and not corrupt actors who profit off others'
misfortunes.
The systemic change that we are envisioning will require new and
enhanced partnerships, which is why we are fortifying a multi-
stakeholder base to counter corruption.
In 2021, we launched USAID's 12th Grand Challenge, inviting problem
solvers from around the world to offer their best ideas on Countering
Transnational Corruption. USAID is seed-funding more than a dozen
promising innovations, including in mineral supply chains. Our
innovators are working in more than 17 countries across Africa, Asia,
and Latin America. For example, USAID and the Department of State are
supporting an online platform, I-KEEP, that makes corruption data more
accessible in public procurement so that it can be used by citizens,
journalists, government representatives, and other stakeholders. Our
recent Doing Business with Integrity call for innovations has received
100 proposals from the private sector and will make awards to entities
demonstrating how anti-corruption efforts can be good for business.
We have also solidified strategic partnerships at the global,
regional, and country levels with the Open Government Partnership (OGP)
and the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI), and
recently provided direct grants to support country-level implementation
of their work. Through U.S. leadership on the OGP Steering Committee,
we hope to elevate our anti-corruption priorities within the broader
global open government conversation and empower other members to act as
good stewards of the cause.
USAID is fully invested in the United States Government's anti-
corruption agenda, especially as an integral part of our broader work
on democratic renewal, to respond to people's longing for dignity and
greater agency to influence the decisions that affect their daily
lives, enjoy fairer systems of government, and see their basic needs
and concerns addressed by those in power.
Chairman Cardin and Ranking Member Risch, thank you for holding
this hearing on implementation of the U.S. Strategy on Countering
Corruption. USAID shares your commitment to the fight against
corruption. We are grateful for the opportunity to share our experience
with the Committee, and I look forward to your questions.
The Chairman. Let me thank both of you not only for your
testimony, but for your public service and what you are doing
on this issue. You both have outlined the risk factors that
corruption involves, whether it is economic, whether it is
political stability, whether it is democratic institutions,
whether it is reliable allies. The list goes on and on and on.
At USAID, you have implemented the new policy. That policy
is aimed at anti-corruption, and specifically you shift your
attention to focus more where corruption is threatening
democracy itself.
Let me put this in context. We have been now seeing a
steady decline of democratic states around the world. Freedom
House reports this every year, and every year there are more
and more countries that are being challenged as being truly
democratic states. Your policy has been in effect now for a
short period of time, but how do you see this change policy
having a positive impact in preserving democratic states?
Ms. Green. Thank you very much for this question. As you
mentioned, corruption really undermines citizens' faith in
democratic institutions, and you see it showing up again and
again and again in public surveys, but also, in my travels,
when you talk to citizens, they believe that government is
working for the wealthy and the well-connected and not for
them. It is that sense of frustration or that disconnect
between the promise of democracy and how it is performing that
is leading to this erosion in support for democracy.
As you noted, the policy is very recent, but what I would
say it is doing is shifting USAID's focus from administrative
corruption, which is obviously a very important issue, to grand
corruption and kleptocracy and transnational corruption, which
really gets to the heart of how public officials are using
their positions of power to siphon off resources.
I would say a couple of things about how this is
manifesting in practice already. Number one, corruption used to
be something that really stayed in the shadows. It was an
uncomfortable topic for USAID mission directors and staff to
talk about. That has absolutely changed. When I travel all
around the world, from Nepal to Sri Lanka, to recently in
Georgia, you see USAID mission directors really engaging with
their country counterparts on corruption, and again sort of
pointedly raising concerns about corruption and how it is
affecting our development assistance in all of these different
areas. That is one, and I think it is really fundamental,
though less tangible.
The Chairman. On that point, I want to stop you so we can
get Mr. Nephew involved here because what you said, in our
missions it cannot be something that is just nice and must be
essential. I am encouraged by what Ms. Green is saying in
regards to it really being embraced at USAID. I have visited
missions all over the world, our U.S. missions all over the
world, and despite the best efforts of Senator Coons to get
them all the resources they need, they still need more
resources. We recognize that there are still a lot of
responsibilities.
I know that they tolerate the congressional branch of
government, but the law that we passed that is going to require
them to do more on corruption, how is that being embraced at
our missions, considering again that they have so many things
they need to do. They try to establish a relationship with the
country in which they are missioned at, and yet we are
demanding that they pay attention to the anti-corruption within
that country. How are you dealing with the leadership in our
missions so that it is embraced, as it looks like it is at
USAID?
Mr. Nephew. Mr. Chairman, thank you for that. I would say
two things. One, most of the missions that I have been to, if
not absolutely all of them, are focused already on the anti-
corruption fight and want to make progress in addressing it. I
think convincing our ambassadors and mission leadership that
this is important really is not really much of a challenge.
The Chairman. I would say that they sometimes try to keep
it quiet rather than putting a spotlight on it.
Mr. Nephew. I think what I would say is that depending on
the circumstance, depending on the country, there is a strong
desire to work directly with the government to try and address
specific challenges, and then in some countries there is a
desire to put it on the front page of the newspapers. Frankly,
that depends a little bit, again, on this country context point
that I made in my opening statement, that in some places it is
seen as more effective and more useful to put the issue front
and center, and in some places quiet engagement directly with
the government can be more effective.
I think this is one of the things that we are embracing as
part of the development of the methodology for the reports that
are required now, is to identify both the areas of progress,
the areas of challenge, and then, importantly, think through
what we do with that information. I am not content to just have
this report. I want to think through what is our strategy to
respond to it. I think this is where we are going to see, in a
lot of missions around the world, a real desire to then make
requests for what they think would be most effective. It might
be working with USAID on specific programs and foreign
assistance activities. It may be additional sanctions tools to
try and put the issue front and center and increase
accountability. It might be improving the economic investment
of companies that are taking this issue quite seriously.
I think we will be thinking through what is the most
effective way to respond to the information that we uncover as
a result of this report.
The Chairman. I appreciate that. I think the support from
the State Department itself is going to be absolutely essential
to know that their work is really being utilized and it is a
priority, not just by our words, but by our actions.
Senator Risch.
Senator Risch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Nephew, I want
to start with you. I assume you are familiar with the report
that was done by the nonprofit NGO, Global Financial Integrity,
in 2022, and I guess it is a little shocking in there, their
explanation, or their shining a light on China's role in drug
trafficking, counterfeiting, IP theft, human trafficking,
wildlife trafficking. When you read that, you are just taken
aback at how involved China is in that sort of thing.
Can you talk to us a little bit, in detail if you can,
about what you are doing in that regard? It is there. We know
it is there. It is happening. Specifically, what is your agency
doing?
Mr. Nephew. Senator, thank you very much for the question.
I would say a couple of things. We are approaching this issue
of fighting corruption in a holistic way and also working with
other parts of both the Department, the Department of the
Treasury, and other parts to deal with the broader set of
challenges associated with illicit financial crime.
I would say that our responses depend a little bit on what
we find in the circumstances of those countries. In some places
we are doubling down on our prevention programs and working to
support the development of financial intelligence units and to
make sure that they are very effective in identifying and
reporting illicit financial movements so that they can then be
subject to prosecutions and investigations. In some cases we
are also working to strengthen the multilateral system and the
rules that are around financial transactions so as to improve
transparency and to make sure that there is the ability to take
those sorts of actions.
This is part of the reason why we embrace things like the
Conference of the States Parties, which looked to improve
accountability and implementation of the U.N. Convention
Against Corruption and to take those steps forward.
We are, of course, also very active in the Financial Action
Task Force, to try and strengthen and improve standards around
the world, as well.
Again, depending a little bit on the country in question,
we are taking a holistic approach in terms of improving the
protection systems that exist to respond to financial crime,
and then responding to those instances, as appropriate.
Senator Risch. It strikes me, too, that there are two very
different buckets here. One is where the government itself is
involved in the corruption versus ones where the government is
trying to do something about it or at least looking the other
way.
China, as we all know, keeps an eye on its citizens pretty
closely, and with the kinds of things that they are doing, one
can only assume that the government, probably at the highest
levels, is fully aware of the corruption that is going on. That
obviously presents a particular challenge.
What are your thoughts on that? How do you get your arms
around something like that?
Mr. Nephew. Senator, thank you. I would say a couple of
things. I would say, first, this is where I am going to come
back to the issue of prevention. Prevention is not the end all
and be all. You also need accountability, but if we are in a
position to strengthen the prevention systems of countries
around the world so that they can identify, detect, and respond
to corruption that is in their own systems, that is the most
effective strategy, especially when you consider how many
countries corruption afflicts and how big this sort of problem
is.
Second, we, of course, continue to do our own
investigations, our own information analysis and to share that
information with partners so that they can then use those
protection systems and accountability tools that they may have
at home to be able to respond to that, as well. I think this is
where we get back to the importance of information and building
networks. It is why we are so committed to the idea of engaging
with civil society, engaging with the private sector, to get
understanding of what they are seeing, what they are learning,
as they operate internationally, to bring all that information
back so that way we can have a much more cohesive approach.
I will say, Senator, just to highlight the point in
general. We are absolutely as committed and as focused as you
are on the strategic corruption issues that emanate from China,
and we are very much sighted on how we can respond to it,
especially thinking more about what our strategy is already
achieving and how we can improve upon it, as well.
Senator Risch. I appreciate that. Ms. Green, I have only
got a few minutes left, but I wanted to drill down for just a
minute on Ukraine. Prior to the war, Ukraine had a well-
deserved reputation for being one of the most corrupt countries
in the world. As a result of that, all of us who were
interested in helping Ukraine push back against the Russians
were concerned about the money that was going in there, the
weapons that were going in there.
This Committee held a hearing with the IGs of three
different agencies led by DoD, and were incredibly impressed
with the work that they were doing, with the hundreds of people
they had auditing, looking over their shoulders, and what have
you. What struck me was with all the money that has gone in
there, and with the ability these people have--these are the
professionals and they have been doing this a long time--were
unable to find any significant corruption in Ukraine. Talking
with the Ukrainians, they do not push back when you talk to
them about their reputation for that, and they say, ``Well,
things have changed because it is unpatriotic to be corrupt.''
With USAID, what is your involvement as far as auditing in
Ukraine and looking out for that sort of thing in Ukraine?
Ms. Green. Thank you for that question. When I was the head
of the Anti-Corruption Task Force, I worked really closely with
the OIG, our Office of Acquisition and Assistance, and the
Management Bureau to strengthen the already robust safeguards
that we have in place across the entire agency and to make sure
that we were consolidating those into easy-to-use reference
guides and then making sure that everybody was aware of all
those options.
In addition, we worked through some of the ways in which we
could strengthen those safeguards, like enhancing third-party
monitoring, increasing auditing, et cetera, et cetera. A lot of
those strategies are being used in Ukraine.
While I do not have day-to-day engagement on that, a lot of
the thought leadership from the task force has contributed to
that very strong system of safeguarding.
Senator Risch. Even though you do not have day-to-day
leadership, in your oversight capacity, do you agree with what
I think most of us here agree with, and that is that we are
watching really, really carefully about every dime that is
spent in Ukraine. Are you in agreement with that?
Ms. Green. I am 1,000 percent in agreement with that.
Senator Risch. Are you in agreement that there has been--
they have found no significant instances of corruption and
siphoning off U.S. taxpayer money in Ukraine, or not going
where it should go?
Ms. Green. That is correct, and the thing that I would add
is that there is also a very robust civil society presence in
Ukraine that has long been monitoring corruption, and they are
also watching very closely and carefully, and they will bring
to light when there are those instances. I do have confidence
in the system in place.
Senator Risch. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Senator Shaheen.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you. Thank you both for being here.
Just to follow up on Senator Risch's point, because Ukraine has
definitely improved its anti-corruption standing. It is meeting
anti-corruption benchmarks that are set by the European Union
as it goes through the accession process to the EU. I know, Mr.
Nephew, that you talked about differences in corruption in
different countries present different challenges.
Given some of the remarkable progress that Ukraine has
made, are there lessons that we can take from what they have
done in Ukraine that we can share with other countries who are
also trying to fight corruption?
I will ask you to begin, Mr. Nephew.
Mr. Nephew. Thank you, Senator. Absolutely. I would say
maybe two or three things at the top. First, it is the whole-
of-government nature both of Ukraine and the United States as
we are working with one another on this. There is a lot of work
that is being done, not just at USAID and the State Department,
but also DoD, throughout the rest of the government, to try and
identify what are the challenges that are facing Ukrainian
partners and how we can support them on this, and that work is
constant.
Second, that it is absolutely essential to have the
engagement of civil society organizations to both provide a
check against government, but also to keep us all informed as
to what the challenges are.
Third, that multilateral support and bringing in all the
parts of the international system is absolutely vital, both
because they can also put more eyes on the issue in question,
but also additional resources. Here again, I want to be clear,
not just foreign assistance resources. I am not talking just
about programmatic dollars. I am talking about diplomatic
resources, investigatory resources, all the different pieces of
government interaction.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you. I have another question for
you, Ms. Green, but I want to get to the Western Balkans first
because the Treasury Department and State have taken really
important steps in designating corrupt officials in the Western
Balkans, as recently as this week. Particularly as many Balkan
countries like Bosnia and Herzegovina progress through the EU
accession process, I think the U.S. needs to take a more active
role in supporting democratic institutions and pushing for
transparency and accountability in the region, and in really
fighting back against malign Russian influence, which has been
significant in that region.
This is probably for you, Mr. Nephew, although if you have
any additions, Ms. Green. What programs in the Western Balkans
have been most successful, and in addition to sanctions
designations, what else can we do to hold corrupt officials
accountable?
Mr. Nephew. Thank you very much. I would say that a lot of
the programs that we at the State Department do are in support
of the judicial sector and improving the judiciary, the
prosecutors, the police forces, both to improve their anti-
corruption character, so that way we do not have corrupt
officials operating inside those sectors, and then their
capacity to hold officials and individuals accountable in their
own countries.
While sanctions and visa restrictions are incredibly useful
tools, and we will continue to use them, accountability is best
when it is done at home. We are working very closely with all
the countries in the Western Balkans to improve their own
accountability tools.
We are also doing a lot to work with investigative
journalists, civil society actors to improve their ability to
both identify and report on these challenges, and importantly,
that they feel secure in doing so. It is worth noting that
anti-corruption champions around the world are under threat and
under attack, and we are always thinking about ways in which we
can strengthen their own protections and make sure that they
have the space to do their vital work.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you. Ms. Green, can you also respond
to that, but add into that the role of media, because you
talked in your opening remarks about the importance of
independent media to be able to look at corruption and expose
it in individual countries, and clearly in the Western Balkans
there are some countries that have more independent media than
others. There are some countries where the administration has
actually taken over the media. Serbia is probably the best
example of that.
Can you talk about why that independent media is so
important?
Ms. Green. Thank you for that question, Senator. Similar to
what Richard was saying, we also have efforts in the Western
Balkans to strengthen the anti-corruption architecture or the
institutions that are really pivotal for preventing, detecting,
and ultimately holding corrupt actors accountable. As you
mentioned, part of that system is strengthening independent
media who are often the ones who expose corruption, bring it to
light, and then force the political figures to do something
about it. In addition, it is oftentimes civil society and the
media who are documenting corruption that then results in
evidence that can be used for sanctions and other
accountability measures.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Senator Ricketts.
Senator Ricketts. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to
our witnesses for being here today.
We cannot have a hearing on corruption if we are not going
to talk about the Palestinian Authority. Corruption within the
Palestinian Authority is widespread, including nepotism,
blackmail, embezzlement. In fact, the Palestinian Authority's
corruption is so widespread it really led to the rise of Hamas
in Gaza.
Initially, President Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian
Authority was touted as being a reformer. I might note that he
is in the 20th year of a 4-year term, the only one he was
elected to, and he has exercised autocratic power in the West
Bank for nearly two decades now. He has diverted public funds
and international aid to enrich himself and his family, and in
2020 a Palestinian whistleblower revealed that Abbas' office
had been regularly transferring European aid money into the
President's personal accounts. Critics of the Palestinian
Authority's rule have often faced torture and arbitrary arrest.
In 2021, Nizar Banat, a popular opposition figure and anti-
corruption activist was killed by the Authority's security
forces. Around 80 percent of Palestinians view the PA as being
corrupt.
Mr. Nephew, do you agree that the Palestinian Authority is
a corruption organization?
Mr. Nephew. Senator, thank you for the question. We have
consistently reminded the Palestinian Authority's leadership
that they have a responsibility to reform and improve the PA's
governance so that it can effectively support the Palestinian
peoples' aspirations, and this is including at the level of the
Secretary, who is engaged with the PA leadership on the need
for revitalization and reform. A senior team continues to
engage Ramallah on this topic now.
The issue of reform and addressing corruption is absolutely
a key part of our engagement with the Palestinian Authority.
Senator Ricketts. You agree then that corruption is a big
problem for the Palestinian Authority?
Mr. Nephew. Senator, I think we are very much sighted on
the fact that corruption is a big challenge for the Palestinian
Authority and that it needs to be managed and responded to
through reforms and revitalization.
Senator Ricketts. Is this a new thing or is this a long-
standing problem?
Mr. Nephew. Senator, I think we have seen corruption issues
in the Palestinian Authority for some time, and again, we
believe that the only people who can reform and address this
issue are the Palestinian people themselves and the Palestinian
Authority, and we are engaged with them on that important
mission.
Senator Ricketts. What steps did the Administration take
before October 7 with regard to corruption in the Palestinian
Authority? Is it just reminding them that they need to take on
this stuff, or are there actually concrete steps the
Administration can point to that we took with regard to the
Palestinian Authority? Were people held accountable for
corruption?
Mr. Nephew. Senator, thank you. We have been through a
variety of different programs at various different points and
times, attempting to improve the accountability systems of the
Palestinian Authority as well as to improve their own ability
to manage resources and so forth. Those activities and programs
have, in some cases, had some successes, but again I think we
agree that there are still many steps that need to be taken by
the Palestinian Authority to be able to address this challenge.
Senator Ricketts. This is an important point because the
Biden administration views the revitalized Palestinian
Authority as a key governing opponent for Gaza after Israel
finishes destroying Hamas. In February, The Wall Street Journal
reported that the Administration was trying to financially prop
up the Palestinian Authority to maintain its hold on power.
President Abbas recently appointed a new Prime Minister,
Mohammad Mustafa, who has been promoted as being somebody who
can bring about these reforms, and he has been talking about
institutions having a zero policy toward corruption.
How do you assess Mustafa's stand on getting corruption and
making reforms, given his previous connection to the PA and
their web of nepotism, and so forth? How do you assess that?
Mr. Nephew. Senator, thank you. We will assess it based on
what we see in terms of actual progress and actual results. I
cannot speculate now on whether or not there is going to be
progress. I think that we continue to press the point that
there needs to be reform, that there needs to be work done to
address this challenge. That remains something that is a
priority, again, for our senior leadership, including at the
level of the Secretary.
We will continue to push for reform, we will continue to
urge the Palestinian Authority to take these steps, and then we
will see, based upon the actual steps taken, whether or not
those kinds of reforms have taken root and whether or not they
are being effective.
Senator Ricketts. All right. Mr. Nephew, it sounds like you
are from Missouri. You are skeptical. You want to see it. Show
me that there is actually going to be progress here. It is
important, though, because if we are going to see progress in
Gaza there has got to be a government that can be trusted, and
so far the Palestinian Authority has not demonstrated that.
They have got their ``pay for slay'' program still in place,
some of the issues I have already mentioned, that without
getting these reforms it seems like the Administration's plan
to have the PA take over Gaza is just not going to be
successful.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Shaheen . Thank you, Senator Ricketts.
Senator Booker.
Senator Booker. Thank you, Chairwoman. It is really great
to have you two here, and I know a lot about your commitment
and work over the years. I am just grateful for your steadfast
focus.
I am doing a lot of work trying to really focus on Africa.
I was there a couple of weeks ago. Hopefully we will get over
there with Chairman Cardin's help on Monday. When I was mayor
of the City of Newark, we saw a big turn in financial just
growth and investment and corporations moving there and
partnerships. One of the best pieces of advice when I got to be
mayor was the two things you should really focus on is safety,
just crime in general, and corruption, and that if people know
those rules of the game.
What is really worrying me about a lot of my trips to
Africa, coming back from Tanzania and Kenya, most recently, is
when I land there I just hear stories replete with the
challenges that are still being faced with corruption, and even
how it affects the political thinking of when I meet with civil
society groups about trying to choose between who might steal
the least amount of money.
It is difficult. You take a country like Kenya that is such
a critical partner for ours, globally, but their process
towards creating the kind of confidence and transparency. You
have Kenya just being gray-listed, for example, again, which is
a tremendous setback for the country and really a blow to a lot
of our investments and efforts in the country, as well.
As I prepare to go to Ghana now and to Nigeria, two other
countries that are facing a lot of challenges, I am wondering,
Mr. Nephew, what kind of progress we have made. The President's
five pillars that he put out in December, in combatting
corruption, I thought were ambitious and strong, but I am
wondering what measurable progress we have made and what are
some of the important pressure points as we try to partner with
these extraordinary nations in Africa that are critical
partners now, but I think are going to be growing in their
urgency and importance on a global scale in the years to come.
Mr. Nephew. Thank you very much for the question, Senator.
I would say maybe two things. First, I very much appreciate
your engagement on this topic and especially with local African
leadership to reinforce that this is a cross-government U.S.
focus and topic. When I travel to Africa, I am always struck
with a similar sense of real opportunity if we can just help
get the bad actors out of the way.
A lot of the work that we have been doing has been about,
again, improving the accountability systems of local
authorities so that way they can hold their actors accountable,
but also providing support through sanctions tools, visa
restrictions, investigatory support, and those sorts of thing.
The second point I would make on this, is that we do have a
whole-of-government approach that we are taking to this,
including foreign assistance activities that are operating out
of USAID, work that we are doing at the State Department, work
that we are doing through our Treasury Department colleagues to
try and improve financial integrity and transparency, work that
is being done by the FBI to be able to support investigations,
including investigations that might have impacts here, where we
can hold people accountable.
What I can say in terms of progress is we have absolutely
seen that there is government commitment, depending again on
the country, to be able to take this agenda up, because they
see the investment challenges----
Senator Booker. Let me pause here. I usually talk to Deputy
Secretary of State Chris Coons  before I go over to any
trip in Africa, but perhaps you and I can talk before this next
trip about some of the pressure points when I meet with
officials.
Before I lose all my time, I just want to bring up one of
the highlights of my journeys in this past year, which was to
Estonia. You want to talk about best practices, there were
things I think our government can learn in terms of their use
of technology and innovation to create transparency, as I found
when I was mayor, is the more sort of objective systems that
you create, the harder it is to create corruption.
I am wondering what we are doing to take best practices
like Estonia is showing and help other governments avail
themselves of these systems and the tools that they are using.
Mr. Nephew. Senator, and Shannon may also want to jump in
here, too. Actually, I am glad you mentioned Estonia. I am
almost the unofficial ambassador of Estonia's digital tools
because I talk about Estonia and they work that they can do
around the world. In fact, I was just in Guatemala, bringing up
the importance of working with the kinds of digital tools that
they have developed.
One of the jobs that I have as Coordinator is to actually
take and identify best practices that we see from around the
world and take them elsewhere, because things that may work
here do not necessarily work in other countries, which have
different cultures, different contexts, but could certainly
work in countries that have similar size or economic
background.
A lot of what we do is identify those kinds of steps that
could be taken and then bring them to other places and make
those kinds of connections.
Ms. Green. Senator, I just wanted to add that we do see
Estonia working with a number of different countries to bring
the innovations they have made on e-governance to those
countries, so Nepal, Tanzania, Zambia, and Malawi come to mind.
We are absolutely helping them export what is so innovative and
novel about their approach.
Senator Booker. Thank you very much. Chairwoman, thank you
so much.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you. We would actually like Estonia
to export that to some of our states in the United States, as
well.
Senator Kaine.
Senator Kaine. Thank you, Senator Shaheen, and thanks to
the witnesses.
A couple of things. I think in this area what we really
need to do, or what I am focused on, is let's find a win. Let's
find a win, a nation that really can move the needle in a big
way with respect to fighting corruption. We have an opportunity
right here in the hemisphere with Guatemala, and I want to
spend some time on Guatemala. The President, President Arevalo,
just was inaugurated. There was a huge effort to stall his
inauguration by the outgoing Giammattei government that was
very corrupt. President Arevalo was not expected to win the
election. He ran an anti-corruption campaign. He is not the
first person to run an anti-corruption campaign in Guatemala,
but huge segments of voters have not believed people when they
have campaigned against corruption, and they were right not to
believe them because presidents like Jimmy Morales and others
get into office and immediately shed their anti-corruption
platform.
Some colleagues and I happened to be in Guatemala to meet
with outgoing President Giammattei and incoming President
Arevalo in early December, and just coincidentally we were
there on the day the coup was launched. It was an effort by the
Attorney General's Office, which has no authority over
elections, to declare the election unlawful, to keep the bad
guys in power. Both the outgoing government and business
community had a lot at stake in maintaining a corruption
society rather than welcoming a society that was trying to rid
itself of corruption.
The election of President Arevalo was occasioned by massive
involvement of indigenous communities and young voters--
Swifties, TikTokers, they got engaged and they helped block
this coup from happening. Even the inauguration of President
Arevalo was delayed for a number of hours, a little bit like
January 6 here, as there was an effort at the last minute by
the legislature to block him from taking power. It was
unsuccessful. He is now the President.
I hope that both State and USAID might look at this as an
opportunity because I believe that President Arevalo is sincere
in this desire to combat corruption that has been endemic in
Guatemala for a very long time. If that project is successful,
it will send such a message throughout a region that needs a
success story, more than us lecturing anybody on, you shouldn't
be corrupt. Watching a nation go from one that has had endemic
corruption problems to one that is successfully battling
corruption, that will have a much bigger impact in the Americas
than anything we might say, any dollar we might spend, any
project that we might promote.
I would like to ask each of you, are you following the
situation in Guatemala and what might we do, from State or
USAID, to assist them successfully in making a transition to a
more transparent, less corrupt government?
Ms. Green. Thank you for that question, Senator. The idea
of investing in winners is really part and parcel of USAID's
approach to anti-corruption, so I could not agree with you
more. Specific to Guatemala, we also recognize this massive
opportunity. During the transition period, USAID actually
started priming the pump to support the Arevalo administration
when it comes into power.
Before being officially appointed, the mission in USAID
organized a technical exchange with Mexico's national anti-
corruption system and also completed an assessment to make sure
that Arevalo knows what resources and plans are in place. We
are now pivoting to help with the establishment of the National
Anti-Corruption Commission. We are absolutely seized with this
moment in mobilizing all of the resources that we have in order
to support this.
Senator Kaine. Mr. Nephew.
Mr. Nephew. Thank you, Senator. In fact, I am just 48 hours
returned from Guatemala, where I joined Under Secretary Jose
Fernandez who led a high-level economic dialogue with the
Guatemalan Government, including President Arevalo and his
entire cabinet, frankly, were gathered there. The explicit
purpose of the trip was to talk about ways in which we can
support both economic revitalization and investment in
Guatemala and also improve the governance structures that,
frankly, at this point are making it very hard for investors to
go into the country. We had wide-ranging discussions about the
various different types of activities that we could do to
support the anti-corruption institutions there, from
procurement reform to accountability to strengthening their own
ability to conduct investigations, and so forth.
We are absolutely committed to the success of the new
government, and we are working very hard on not just the
general sense of what we can do, but specific programs and
activities that we can do in cooperation with them.
Senator Kaine. I want to finish just by commenting on
Senator Ricketts' questions about Palestine. One of the things
that is discouraging to me, well, but encouraging and
discouraging, is any time I ever got Israel, I go to the West
Bank, and I interact with Palestinians. I see such a talent
pool in young Palestinians. That is encouraging. Then I say,
``Wow, it is people like you that should be running for office
and thinking about being in government,'' and they say, ``That
is too corrupt. I want to be a doctor. I want to be an
entrepreneur.''
Corruption ends up chasing away a talent pool that is ready
to assume the mantle of leadership in a Palestinian future.
Dealing with these corruption issues is really, really
important. There is a talent pool there that is going to do
fantastic things, but if they do not believe government is an
avenue where they can do fantastic things for their people,
they will not pursue it, and it will be to the detriment of
Palestinians, Israelis, and the entire region. Thank you.
The Chairman . Senator Murphy has allowed
Senator Coons to go next.
Senator Coons. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank my
colleague from Connecticut. I want to congratulate you,
Chairman Cardin, on seeing the Combatting Global Corruption Act
become law. I think this is an important step forward, and I
think this hearing is a critical step in our making sure that
it becomes an effective tool for interagency cooperation and
for a whole-of-government approach that incorporates anti-
corruption efforts at all levels, with multiple stakeholders. I
look forward to partnering with you and ensuring that it is
funded and sustained for the long term.
As you have heard from everybody on this panel, combatting
corruption is critical. It is also strategically important in
the sub-Saharan region that I have dedicated a lot of time and
effort to, direct competition with China, and more recently
Russia, in particular the Wagner Group, brings corruption
particularly directly to the fore. Endemic corruption is a
widespread challenge. Half of the 20 most corrupt countries in
the world are in sub-Saharan Africa. It is also a region with
unbelievable potential, both natural resources, human
resources, and a population that is dispirited, angry at the
level of both petty and large-scale corruption they see every
day.
If we were to successfully earn the reputation for being
champions of rule of law and anti-corruption in the region, I
think it would be a significant competitive advantage for us
and reinforce our core values. We have long had business
competitors from even European countries that are more
comfortable with corruption than we are. The Foreign Corrupt
Practices Act has for decades prohibited U.S. companies from
engaging in corruption, even when some competitors that are
close allies did not have restrictions on anything like that.
First, apparently there was just a Summit on Democracy in
Korea, which I just discovered in doing some research for this
hearing, where combatting corruption was a principal pillar of
it. I would be interested in hearing, Mr. Nephew, what you see
as the future of combatting corruption in sub-Saharan Africa,
in particular, what tools you think might be particularly
effective that we might borrow from other regions of the world,
and what you saw as the most important outcomes from the recent
summit in Korea.
The Chairman. I would point out that Ms. Green was at that
summit.
Senator Coons. Forgive me.
Mr. Nephew. Senator, if I may, maybe I will start it, but
then I will transition to Shannon to speak about the summit.
Senator Coons. Please do.
Mr. Nephew. To your point and question about working with
sub-Saharan Africa, in particular, I think that there are maybe
three things that are our highest priority activities. First,
is helping to create the kinds of systems that are just less
easy to corrupt, and this goes back to the question earlier
about issues of digitalization, improving procurement reform,
improving transparency, working with civil society groups.
There is no one particular piece of the prevention puzzle that
will address that, but it is all of those pieces that will
ensure that budgetary resources are going where they need to
go.
Second, is ensuring that there is accountability and
ensuring that bad actors, when they are identified, are
responded to. I think this has proven uncomfortable in some
places, especially as you see transitions in political power
where there is a desire to maybe protect some of your own and
only go after the other side.
One of our main messages is the rule of law does not work
if it is just one sided. It needs to hold everyone equal to
those same sorts of standards, and that is why the
accountability measures need to also take the same approach.
The third thing I will say is that looking to find ways to
increase business investment, especially reputable business
investment, to your point, sir, about making sure that we are
focused like a laser on how much we can encourage American
businesses and others that have high standards of performance
in anti-corruption to respond.
Senator Coons. Thank you. Ms. Green.
Ms. Green. On the Summit for Democracy, I did indeed just
return from Seoul yesterday. There are three things that I
think are of note in terms of outcomes.
Number one, the theme of the summit was ``Democracy for
Future Generations,'' so there were a lot of young people
there, which I think, as several of your colleagues have noted,
are absolutely critical for moving democracy forward, but also
this drive on anti-corruption.
Secondly, the first Summit for Democracy resulted in a lot
of commitments, 750 from 100 different countries, many of which
were in the anti-corruption space. There was reporting out on
those commitments, and countries were really pushing each other
to go even further. I think that was really important.
Third, sharing of best practices, particularly on financial
integrity issues. There were a number of convenings. Then
fourth, really building this community and solidarity amongst
anti-corruption champions.
Senator Coons. Thank you. I hope, depending on the timing
of this body, to be traveling to Angola, Zambia, and Malawi
next week as well as Cabo Verde, a country with a relatively
good reputation. Zambia, in the middle of complex political
transition in an environment where anti-corruption is a key
part of the Hichilema government. Angola, a country trying to
move forward after decades of both civil war and profound
corruption.
I would be interested, briefly, what you see as the most
important steps we could take to support anti-corruption
campaigns in any of these three countries, in particular, and
then I will yield.
Ms. Green. I will start with Zambia. I think the number one
thing is accountability. There has been impunity for endemic
corruption for a very long time, and people really need to see
that high-level actors are being held accountable for
corruption in order to deter it in the future.
Mr. Nephew. Sir, just again, being brief, I would agree
with Shannon on the accountability piece. I will also say it is
ensuring that especially extractive industries are held to the
highest standards, and this is why we have been working with
things like the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative,
to try and improve those standards, and working with companies
operating in that space to only take the highest standards into
their business activities.
Senator Coons. I worked for years, in a bipartisan way, on
combating wildlife trafficking, in no small part because that
is often an entryway to then much larger corruption.
Thank you for your forbearance, to my colleagues and the
Chairman.
The Chairman. Senator Cruz.
Senator Cruz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Nephew,
corruption in the Western Hemisphere poses direct risks to
American national security. Our adversaries exploit that
corruption to literally buy up governments. To counter such
corruption, Congress has provided the President with powerful
sanctions, including, and especially, the so-called 7031(c)
sanctions.
Now in your opening statement you discussed the
Administration's desire to extend those sanctions, but as I
have discussed with the State Department multiple times, I am
deeply concerned that the Biden administration has politicized
corruption sanctions. Those decisions have broadly undermined
the integrity of our sanctions regime. You have used corruption
sanctions to bludgeon countries and international figures whom
Democrats simply do not like, while ignoring much more
significant violations by those embraced by the global populous
left, by the Castristas and Chavistas across the hemisphere.
The State Department has imposed corruption sanctions
multiple times against Western Hemisphere figures they perceive
to be conservative, most recently against the former President
of Guatemala. Christina Fernandez Kirchner, Argentina's former
Vice President, was convicted of corruption in her own country
for skimming nearly $1 billion from fake construction
contracts. I have repeatedly asked State Department officials
why the Biden administration has not sanctioned her for her
corruption, and I still have not gotten a satisfactory answer.
Now I am asking you. Why haven't you imposed corruption
sanctions on her and her associates?
Mr. Nephew. Thank you, Senator. Sir, we do not speculate or
discuss or preview sanctions designations, visa restrictions,
before they take place, or comment on any investigations that
may or may not be underway. Sir, I would not have any comment
on that specific case.
On the broader point, sir, we undertake our visa
restrictions and sanctions designations on the basis of the
importance of combating corruption and the statutory
requirements for taking those sorts of actions. Political
affiliations play no part in who we decide to impose those
sanctions on or how to use those tools. Thank you, sir.
Senator Cruz. With all due respect, that is just
objectively not credible. You sanction governments you do not
like, and you ignore leftist friends of yours who are utterly
corrupt.
How about Lula in Brazil? Lula was convicted by multiple
Brazilian courts of corruption and money laundering. His
conviction was annulled on jurisdictional grounds. After Lula's
election, President Biden invited him to the White House,
embraced him as a ``friend and partner in democracy.'' Lula
later partnered with Iran to allow Iranian war ships access and
services in the Western Hemisphere.
Given Lula's past corruption, are you concerned that his
assistance to Iran is linked to current corruption?
Mr. Nephew. Senator, as I said, we do not comment on any
particular investigations that may or may not be underway or
comment on particular individuals and----
Senator Cruz. That is a convenient stance, but on the face
of it, it is very easy. If you want to be corrupt, be a
leftist, then the Biden administration will pat you on the back
and encourage you. It is obvious to anyone watching. Simply
saying we do not comment on it, look, you guys are doing the
same thing in Israel, where you sanction Jews and you do not
sanction Hamas. It is very simple. You use sanctions as a
political bludgeon and as political protection for the people
you decide you like.
Let's shift somewhere else, which is South Africa. I am
concerned that corruption in South Africa is undermining
American interests. Under the Ramaphosa government, South
Africa has been swamped by endemic corruption. South Africa's
chief justice recently submitted a 5,000-page report detailing
just some of the corruption from just the last few years. Are
you tracking these concerns? What is the State Department doing
to combat corruption in South Africa?
Mr. Nephew. Senator, thank you very much for the question.
Corruption issues have been a focus of our work in South
Africa, again across the arc of different activities, whether
we are talking about specific prevention-related programs or
support to the financial intelligence units and to prosecutors
and accountability institutions there, as well. We are also
very much engaged with civil society organizations and others
to improve reporting on corruption-related trends and problems
that are identified.
Senator Cruz. One place in particular where we have seen
the consequences in South Africa is related to our ally,
Israel. South Africa has become a global leader in undermining
Israel, including lodging a case against Israel in the
International Court of Justice. There are multiple serious,
credible allegations that South Africa's decision-making is
being driven by corruption related to Iran. South African
Foreign Minister Pandor met with Iranian President Raisi in
Tehran to coordinate, and Ramaphosa himself has been implicated
in bribery scandals.
Are you concerned that corruption and bribery are greasing
the Iranian-South African relationship?
Mr. Nephew. Senator, we have been very clear that we have
got concerns regarding corruption activities coming out of
Iran. As I have been saying, we are concerned about corruption
around the world and any instances of it will be investigated
by the Department of State, the Department of Treasury, the
intelligence community, and others in order to respond.
I should also note, sir, that when I was describing some of
the activities we have got ongoing in South Africa, one of the
other activities we have is support to the FBI to be able to
have an investigator and a supporter of improving the systems
that are there, as well, who also engages in regional activity,
as well. We are very much focused on corruption challenges in
South Africa, and as a relation to that we are also focused on
the challenge of Iran and Iranian corrupt activities that might
be taking place internationally.
Senator Cruz. Thank you.
The Chairman. Senator Murphy.
Senator Murphy. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr.
Nephew, I wanted to sort of ask you a big-picture question
here. The very nature of authoritarian, kleptocratic regimes
are inherently corrupt. Many of our closest security allies, in
a place like the Middle East, are stealing from their people on
a daily basis. They get celebrated state visits here in
Washington, they meet with members of the Foreign Relations
Committee, and every single day they are robbing from their
people.
This is not a circumstance of this Administration. This is
a circumstance of broader American policy. As we start to use
corruption sanctions more aggressively, what stands out to
folks is that if you have a key strategic security relationship
with the United States, we tend to look the other way. If you
are not essential to U.S. national security, you are just more
likely to be on the list.
I just think this is a legitimate critique, and I wonder
what you have to say about this idea that a country's security
relationship with the United States ultimately has a lot to do
with whether leaders of that country are going to find
themselves the subject of U.S. sanctions.
Mr. Nephew. Senator, thank you for that question. I would
say two things. First, again as a general principle, we, again,
do not comment on any investigations that may be taking place.
Our investigations are not limited to any particular geography.
There are no countries where we have said this is a no-go in
terms of doing investigations. We follow the information that
is available to us, and then apply the measures that we have
statutorily provided to us, again, using the resources that we
have available. Our resources are not infinite to conduct these
sorts of investigations.
The second point I would make on the broader kind of
challenge I think you are identifying, we look at sanctions as
being one part of the whole toolkit, and the toolkit includes a
number of other different activities, including support for
strengthening accountability institutions, but also
transparency, procurement reform, those sorts of steps, as
well. In some cases it may be most effective to improve the
transparency systems of the country in question to support its
accountability missions as opposed to taking action coming from
the United States directly.
I think one element of this is that there are different
ways that in different countries we might be most effective. We
are very much willing to both investigate individuals in the
countries that you are identifying, but we are also cognizant
of the fact that there are other tools that may be more
effective in certain circumstances.
Senator Murphy. Yes. You do not have to conduct an
investigation to figure out that the very structure of many of
these countries involve taking resources that should be
available for the benefit of the entire nation and using them
in a way to benefit only a handful of families. There may be a
very good reason why you do not want to sanction the leaders of
countries that we have deep security relationships with, but I
just pointed out we sometimes celebrate the fact that we are
increasingly using sanctions as a means to protect our values.
It works both ways.
Ms. Green, I wanted to talk to you, and I am happy if there
is time to get your thoughts on this, as well, Mr. Nephew,
about how we staff anti-corruption work. I made a proposal a
few years ago that we should have a core of dedicated anti-
corruption officers in the State Department and perhaps at
USAID. Because right now this work is being done by USAID FSOs
or political officers at the State Department who have huge
briefs, and you only get to use a portion of your time to do
anti-corruption work. Listen, we have a bigger fight here about
how to better resource the State Department and diplomacy, but
this, frankly, would not cost a ton of money to decide that we
are going to develop a dedicated core of anti-corruption
officers. We are going to put them on the ground in key places
so that there is somebody, one person, waking up every day in
countries where rule of law is slipping away, thinking about
this issue and this issue only.
Just reflect on your thoughts on that proposal.
Ms. Green. Thank you, Senator. When I started at USAID
nearly 3 years ago as the head of Anti-Corruption Task Force,
there was one person in Washington solely focused on anti-
corruption. We now have seven direct hires focused on anti-
corruption and then other program-funded staff in the Anti-
Corruption Center, which is now is the Democracy, Human Rights,
and Governance Bureau. We have increased incrementally. USAID
missions, we are also training people who are both democracy
and governance officers as well as cross-training people who
focus on education, health, environment, et cetera, et cetera,
to be champions and experts in anti-corruption, but there is no
question that we need to continue to build capacity.
Senator Murphy. Mr. Nephew.
Mr. Nephew. Thank you, Senator. Actually, one of the
outcomes of the CGCA that was passed is the identification of a
POC, one individual who is responsible for anti-corruption
efforts at all of our embassies, a project that we had already
initiated, to some extent, by seeking out those individuals and
staffing the embassies to make sure there is at least one
person in those places that is responsible for these
portfolios.
I think to Shannon's point, as well, we are always looking
to identify how we can better resource this activity. I think
one of the things that will come out of the methodology report,
as the Chairman mentioned, was the question about resourcing
the implementation of the act as well. I think we might have
more information going forward about how we can better resource
this.
Senator Murphy. I will just make one last point. This also
would be a way to not be so heavily reliant on sanctions
policy, if you had people on the ground who were sort of doing
the slow, hard work with civil society. You would not only have
the--I know this is not our only tool, but you would not be so
reliant on the punitive tool.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Senator Murphy, your point is so well taken.
One of the principal objectives of combatting global corruption
is to develop the capacity not just at the State Department,
but at our missions, particularly in countries where it is a
major, major concern on the government. Yes, the bill will
require a point of contact, but we hope that it will also lead
to a budget that will reflect having the type of person Senator
Murphy is referring to in those countries, where it is needed,
a person whose sole responsibility is to deal with anti-
corruption. I very much appreciate you raising that issue.
Now it is my pleasure----
Mr. Nephew. Mr. Chairman, if I may, just because I want to
come back on this exact point. One of the other pieces that I
should have mentioned, as well, of course, is through our INL
sections. In many parts of the world we already have some
individuals who are solely focused on the anti-corruption
mission, as well. It is not yet uniform, I would say, across
all of our missions around the world, but depending on the
country in question and depending on what types of sections we
have, in some cases we have very full staffs and in other
places less so. Thank you, sir.
The Chairman. We would like you to share that information
with us. The Combatting Global Corruption has been frequently
mentioned. Senator Young was the principal leader on the
Republican side on that legislation. I want everyone to know
that when we were getting close to the finish line, we would
have not gotten to the finish line but for Senator Young's
efforts in breaking a couple of arms on the floor of the United
States Senate. I want to thank him for that, and recognize him.
Senator Young, take as much time as you want.
.
Senator Young. That was kind of you, Chairman. Chairman,
you have shown such amazing leadership on this issue, and it
was a privilege to have an opportunity to partner with you on
the last mile of this effort.
Thank you both for being here today. Thank you for your
work. I am glad Senator Murphy asked some questions about
localization and related topics. I wanted to turn to that
provision in the law that supporting localization of the
Department's anti-corruption efforts through the creation of an
anti-corruption points of contact at our embassies. You spoke
some to that, Mr. Nephew. I am going to give you an opportunity
to maybe unpack a little bit more how you anticipate this new
authority aiding the Department's implementation of Pillar 1 of
the strategy, how all that will interact. Yes, expound on your
previous remarks.
Mr. Nephew. Thank you very much, Senator. Maybe two things
then I would emphasize. First, we are very focused not just on
the development of the report, but also what comes after. We
think the report is going to be a very useful document,
especially the public one, to help encourage investment, to
help encourage other countries around the world to also apply
support for those countries that are making a lot of progress.
We think that the classified report will be very useful in
terms of directing where additional activities may be needed.
We are focused on that piece--what do we do thereafter? I
think this goes to the question of the localization piece. One
of the efforts that will come out of the report will be
identifying what we think the root cause is of the challenge
that we are facing with either corruption backsliding or where
we are seeing progress what more can be done. That will help to
identify where we need additional programmatic resources. That
might be something that either comes out of USAID or comes out
of the State Department or elsewhere.
The second thing is we think that the report will help to,
again, mainstream anti-corruption into the overall work of the
foreign missions that are in question. One of the things that
we have already seen is when we raised the issue of a
congressional report, including with our foreign interlocuters.
Their ears do perk up and there is a question as to how that
report is going to be drafted and what kinds of steps need to
be taken to demonstrate progress. We think it will help to
galvanize ambassadors, deputy chiefs of missions, and certainly
support from Washington to bring those kinds of demand signals
that will be necessary to make progress over the course of the
report.
Senator Young. Thank you. Ms. Green, I saw you nod
affirmatively as Mr. Nephew spoke. Do you have anything to add?
Ms. Green. Yes. The things I wanted to add is in a number
of embassies around the world you see cross-cutting teams from
all of the different sections coming together to focus on anti-
corruption. Just a couple of weeks ago, I was in Sri Lanka. The
ambassador has decided that this is the year in which they are
really going to double down on anti-corruption. You already
have all of the components of the U.S. Government coming
together in many, many countries and thinking strategically
about what they can do on corruption together. I have found
that to be very encouraging.
Senator Young. That is fantastic. It is as though you are
anticipating my follow-up questions. Yes, I was going to ask
you by way of follow-up how the Department intends to continue
empowering individuals so that they can effectively contribute
to our diplomatic and development priorities at their
respective posts. It seems as though the incentives are there.
It is already sort of happening. Do you have anything to add on
that topic?
Mr. Nephew. Senator, if I can, I will just say one of the
things that we have also embraced is the idea of a learning
agenda and making sure that we are not just resting on old
assumptions about what works, especially in the fight against
corruption. We are doing a lot to both bring new research, new
evidence, new information out to our posts, but also give them
a sense of what kinds of programs exist and ask them, ``Is
there more that you need?'' ``Are there different tools that
you could potentially use?'' ``What are the things that would
be most empowering here?''
We are trying to make this also not just a one-way
communication effort with posts, but also solicit from them
what else they need in terms of support.
Senator Young. Thank you. Yes, Ms. Green.
Ms. Green. Yes, just very quickly adding to that. I think
the biggest change over the past couple of years is what we
have learned on anti-corruption and transmitting those lessons.
We have invested in several research products, including on
dekleptification, how do you use social and behavioral change
approaches to address corruption, and then also how to address
corruption in low political will environments. Those are all
resources that we are training our local staff on so that they
can be more effective in fighting corruption.
Senator Young. Very good. Thank you, Chairman.
The Chairman. Senator Van Hollen.
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank both
of you for your service and testimony. I do want to applaud my
friend and partner from the state of Maryland, the Chairman of
the Committee, Senator Cardin, for all his work in this anti-
corruption area. He is the author of the original Magnitsky Act
and then, of course, expanded to include the Global Magnitsky
Act, which is a very important tool.
Mr. Nephew, I am trying to sort through the different
authorities that are available with respect to imposing
sanctions, visa restrictions on individuals or entities,
because there does seem to be a mish-mash, an overlap of these
authorities. We have got, for example, the ability to target
corrupt actors in human rights abuses under the Global
Magnitsky Sanctions. There is also a provision embedded in the
SFOPS bill since 2008, which is Section 7031(c), that imposes
visa restrictions on individuals committing human rights abuses
or engaged in corruption, as well as another authority in
Section 212 of the Immigration and Nationality Act. There are a
couple of others I may get to.
I am just trying to figure out how, between the State
Department and the Department of Treasury you decide to apply
these different tools, and when. Can you just try to quickly
highlight the differences and how you use one versus another?
Mr. Nephew. Senator, I am also a sanctions professor, so I
am going to avoid that too much. Let me say, very briefly, I
think you highlighted a couple of provisions that are with the
State Department that deal with visas, and those ultimately
come down to the fact that it is the State Department authority
and State Department that makes the visa determinations as part
of the visa restriction programs. The work we do when we are
considering whether or not to impose a visa restriction is in
part determined by statutory requirement--7031(c) designations
are required when we have evidence of significant corruption,
but other visa authorities are more discretionary, if we have
indications that we have got concerns there.
The Treasury Department has got asset freeze primarily
related sanctions, most notably through GloMag, but also
through some country-specific programs. We were talking earlier
about the Western Balkans. Lebanon also has a country-specific
program, as well.
The practical difference in terms of what people on the
outside see is pretty modest. Whether or not you use the
Lebanon authority or GloMag authority, it is an asset freeze
and instruction coming from the Treasury Department. We do see
utility in the messaging of which tool is potentially used as
well the teams, frankly, that are doing this kind of work
inside the government from a bureaucratic perspective.
You asked about how we decide. Again, the State Department
has got some authorities that are statutorily mandated.
7031(c)'s are if we find that there is a significant
corruption, so we take those actions as we find those
determinations. In other cases we have just a straightforward
conversation to coordinate with the Treasury Department and
others to say is this one where you think you have got the
right kinds of information to pursue an asset freeze, and is
that the right tool to use against that particular individual
or entity, will that be the most effective step.
Senator Van Hollen. Are there different standards that
apply using different authorities with respect to findings of
corruption or human rights abuses, and quickly if you could
identify the most salient differences.
Mr. Nephew. Yes. I would say as a general matter the GloMag
authority is about significant corruption or significant human
rights-related abuses, and there are practical ways in which
the word ``significance'' is used to make discrimination
against others, but that is the general kind of big basket is
corruption and human rights.
In cases like Western Balkans and other places, the prongs
in the Executive orders that are important here talk about
whether or not there is an impact on peace and stability in the
Western Balkans or peace and stability in Lebanon. The words
are very specific in the Executive order. Depending on which
order you are using, you would have to both substantiate that
there is a bad act that is taken, but also potentially there is
a connection to instability, insecurity, or those sorts of
things.
I think there are different standards that are used, and
frankly those get into very weedy technical definitions that
the lawyers would want to have that concrete discussion. The
upshot is in any case we have to be able to demonstrate and
prove that there are significant acts of corruption,
significant violations of human rights that are being taken,
and be able to defend those actions in court.
Senator Van Hollen. Understood, and I may follow up with
you on some of the in-the-weeds stuff through a question. I do
have a question regarding coordination because I took an
official trip overseas a number of months ago. One of the
countries I visited was Sri Lanka. In that case the State
Department had, through the normal process, issued visas to
some senior Sri Lankan Government officials. They showed up at
the airport to travel to the United States only to be turned
away because the Department of Homeland Security had used
Section 3(e) of the INA to designate somewhere in the process
these individuals as having been somehow tagged or involved
with torture in the past.
Now, obviously this is a very significant charge, and we
want to make sure that anybody who has been engaged in torture
is flagged, but what this demonstrated, though, was a real lack
of coordination. Again, regardless of the merits of the
underlying DHS claim, it was embarrassing to the United States
Government to have a senior Sri Lankan official get a visa
through the normal process, show up at the airport only to be
denied. Can you talk about that? I have heard that this is not
just an isolated case.
Mr. Nephew. Senator, on this specific case I am not
familiar enough to comment.
Senator Van Hollen. No, I don't mean that, but I mean the
issue.
Mr. Nephew. I would say, as a general matter, again, the
title ``coordinator'' indicates an ambition as well as
something that we are already attempting to do. We are always
attempting to improve the internal coordination mechanisms,
whether it is between DHS and the State Department, State
Department and Treasury, and others, as well. I would be happy
to take back that specific question to get you an answer as to
what happened and----
Senator Van Hollen. Yes. I am not so worried about this
specific case, although I am interested. My understanding is
this is not an isolated situation, this lack of coordination,
and the subsequent embarrassment to the embassies overseas. My
understanding is that DHS officials have a lot of sort of lower
set of requirements that they have to establish before they tag
someone's name in the system, and that they do not necessarily
coordinate or report that to the State Department, which is why
you have these things. Again, if there is a clear process where
someone is identified as involved in torture, obviously we want
to make sure they do not get a visa, but this was a case where
the State Department went through its normal process, granted
the visa, and again, only to have the person stopped and
embarrassment caused.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Van Hollen. I would point
out that from a legal point of view the standards concerning
the issuance of visas or right to come into our country, there
is a lot more latitude given than if it is a financial sanction
such as what Treasury has to sign off on, in regard to the
rights of property.
We do want to make sure that the policies are consistent
with our laws and our values, and that is, of course, always a
challenge when you have different agencies that are looking at
it from a different point of view. Thank you for being the
coordinator. I wish you good luck in that regard. I try to
coordinate the members of this Committee. That is not an easy
task, so thank you for that.
The record of the Committee will stay open until close of
business tomorrow for questions for the record. We would ask
that you try to respond to them in a timely way. I thank you
very much. This has been an extremely important and informative
hearing, and thank you for your participation.
With that, the hearing will stand adjourned.

----------
Additional Material Submitted for the Record
Responses of Mr. Richard Nephew to Questions
Submitted by Senator James E. Risch
Question. Which criteria does the State Department use to determine
which officials from Latin American and Caribbean governments are
subject to 7031(c) designations? Which criteria does it follow to
determine which designation should be public or private?
Answer. Section 7031(c) designation criteria are the same for
officials of all countries, requiring that the Secretary of State make
such determinations if he has credible information of an official's
involvement in significant corruption or a gross violation of human
rights. The Department conducts a rigorous review of a variety of
sources to determine whether information meets the threshold for such
designations. The Department generally prefers to designate publicly
but designates privately when necessary to accommodate sensitive
considerations, in keeping with the spirit of the legislation.
Question. Which criteria does the State Department use to determine
which officials from Latin American and Caribbean governments are not
subject to 7031(c) designations despite evidence of their involvement
in cases of significant corruption? Which criteria does it follow to
determine which designation should be public or private?
Answer. Because Section 7031(c) is a mandatory statutory authority,
the Secretary must publicly or privately designate officials about whom
he has credible information of involvement in significant corruption or
a gross violation of human rights. The Department conducts a rigorous
review of a variety of sources to determine whether information meets
the threshold for designation. The Department generally prefers to
designate publicly but designates privately when necessary to
accommodate sensitive considerations, in keeping with the spirit of the
legislation.
Question. Which criteria does the State Department use to determine
which officials from Latin American and Caribbean governments are
subject to Section 212(a)(3)(C) designations?
Answer. Under Section 212(a)(3)(C) of the Immigration and
Nationality Act (INA), an individual is inadmissible if the Secretary
determines that the individual's entry or proposed activities in the
United States ``would have potentially serious adverse foreign policy
consequences for the United States.'' In the Western Hemisphere, the
Department has established policies under Section 212(a)(3)(C) that
target persons involved in undermining democracy and the rule of law in
Northern Central America, operating street gangs and other criminal
organizations in Haiti, and facilitating irregular migration to the
United States, among others. Any individual falling within the target
class of such policies may be identified for visa restrictions.
Question. How does the State Department assess the effectiveness of
sanctions and 7301(c) designations in achieving their intended goals in
Latin America and the Caribbean?
Answer. Sanctions and other authorities, including Section 7031(c),
are important tools in the Department's efforts to promote
accountability for human rights violations and abuses, counter impunity
for corruption, and address democratic backsliding in the Western
Hemisphere. Financial sanctions in particular are designed to promote
individual behavior change and spur meaningful systemic change in
furtherance of our foreign policy objectives. During this
Administration we have used these tools across the region, including
but not limited to Colombia, Cuba, Guatemala, Haiti, Nicaragua, and
Paraguay. Designations are highly fact-based and context-specific, and
the Department works with our embassies, the interagency, and civil
society to gather and analyze relevant information regarding impact,
including impacts that may manifest themselves over the long term.
Question. Has the State Department taken any steps since October
2023 to consider the evidence of former Ecuadorian President Rafael
Correa's acts of significant corruption, as evidenced in his 2020
bribery conviction and all other evidence related to activities during
his presidency?
Answer. The Department continually reviews and assesses information
on officials' involvement in corrupt acts. While the Department does
not comment on specific Section 7031(c) cases, we welcome any credible
information your offices would like to provide on current or former
government officials' involvement in significant corruption.
Question. Does the State Department assess that there is evidence
that Correa engaged in acts of significant corruption?
Answer. While the Department does not comment on specific Section
7031(c) cases, we welcome any credible information your offices would
like to provide on current or former government officials' involvement
in significant corruption.
Question. What criteria is the State Department using to determine
whether Correa has engaged in acts of significant corruption?
Answer. The Department does not comment on specific Section 7031(c)
cases. A Section 7031(c) determination requires that the Secretary of
State have credible information of the official's involvement in
significant corruption or a gross violation of human rights. The
Department conducts a rigorous review of a variety of sources to
determine whether information meets the threshold for designation.
Question. Has the State Department taken any steps since December
2023 to consider the evidence of former Vice President of Argentina
Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner's acts of significant corruption, as
evidenced in her December 2022 conviction and all other evidence
related to activities during her presidency and vice presidency?
Answer. The Department continually reviews and assesses information
on officials' involvement in corrupt acts. While the Department does
not comment on specific Section 7031(c) cases, we welcome any credible
information your offices would like to provide on current or former
government officials' involvement in significant corruption.
Question. Does the State Department assess that there is evidence
that Fernandez de Kirchner and her family members engaged in acts of
significant corruption?
Answer. While the Department does not comment on specific Section
7031(c) cases, we welcome any credible information your offices would
like to provide on current or former government officials' involvement
in significant corruption.
Question. What criteria is the State Department using to determine
whether Fernandez de Kirchner and her family members have engaged in
acts of significant corruption?
Answer. The Department does not comment on specific Section 7031(c)
cases. A Section 7031(c) determination requires that the Secretary of
State have credible information of the official's involvement in
significant corruption or a gross violation of human rights. The
Department conducts a rigorous review of a variety of sources to
determine whether information meets the threshold for designation.
Question. What specific actions has the State Department taken to
utilize sanctions to target corruption related to or in benefit of the
malign activities and influence of the People's Republic of China in
Latin America?
Answer. The Department does not share details of our deliberative
process for sanctions or visa restriction actions. To implement these
authorities, we conduct a rigorous review of information from a variety
of sources, including credible media reporting, civil society
reporting, U.S. Government reporting, and other sources of information.
We continue to review and assess information regarding foreign malign
activity throughout the region. We also continue to engage
diplomatically on these issues with partners in the region, and
encourage civil society, activists, and journalists to raise concerns
with their governments about corruption. Last, all of our anti-
corruption prevention-focused activities are intended to deny corrupt
actors the opportunity and means to operate, regardless of their origin
or affiliations.
Question. Please provide the full list of individuals or entities
in Latin America and the Caribbean sanctioned for corruption related to
the activities of the People's Republic of China, the Russian
Federation, or the Islamic Republic of Iran since January 2021.
Answer. The Department does not share details of our deliberative
process for sanctions or visa restriction actions. We continue to
review and assess information regarding corruption related to foreign
malign activity throughout the regions.
We can share the public designation from November 18, 2022, by the
Department of the Treasury, Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC), in
coordination with the Department of State, of one Russian national,
Dmitry Kudryakov, one Belarusian national, Iryna Litviniuk, as well as
three associated entities, for their role in exploiting the Guatemalan
mining sector. Litviniuk conducted corrupt acts in furtherance of
Russian influence peddling schemes by unlawfully giving cash payments
to public officials in exchange for support for Russian mining
interests.
In addition, the Department works globally in coordination with
Treasury and other partners to levy sanctions and other measures to
address foreign malign activity and promote accountability. For
example, the United States has sanctioned numerous individuals and
entities connected to the violent Russian military group PMC Wagner
(Wagner Group). Targeting these types of corrupt actors reduces their
ability to conduct their activities in other regions, including Latin
America and the Caribbean.
Question. What criteria is the State Department using to sanction
individuals or entities involved in corruption in Latin America and the
Caribbean related to the activities of the three above mentioned
countries?
Answer. Sanctions and visa restrictions to promote accountability
for individuals and entities involved in corruption is part of an
interagency process, including the Departments of Treasury, State, and
other partners. These tools are part of a multifaceted efforts to
counter corruption globally. We do not comment on specific steps or
cases under consideration, but all cases go through a rigorous review
process, including evaluating a variety of sources and undergoing a
robust legal review.
Question. Please describe how the U.S. Anti-Corruption Strategy has
been applied in Venezuela.
Answer. We have advanced our anti-corruption efforts in Venezuela
through both diplomatic and foreign assistance efforts. We also
continue to review and assess information on officials' involvement in
corrupt acts to consider additional sanctions and accountability
measures, where appropriate.
On the diplomatic front, senior Department officials, including
myself, engage with civil society, private sector, and other non-
governmental actors who are working to promote rule of law and
accountability in Venezuela. On foreign assistance, the Department is
working to enhance coordination on existing programs, highlight ongoing
needs, and integrate anti-corruption into a wide range of projects. For
example, the Bureau of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement is
supporting efforts to gather information for criminal proceedings that
could serve as evidence to corruption, money laundering, or other
crimes. In addition, the Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor
supports work to expose supranational grand corruption networks
originating in Venezuela and to seek accountability through third-
country mechanisms.
Question. Please describe how implementation of the U.S. Anti-
Corruption Strategy will target individuals and entities involved in
corruption in Venezuela.
Answer. We continue to review and assess information regarding
officials' or entities' involvement in corrupt acts to consider
additional sanctions and accountability measures, where appropriate.
Question. Please list the individuals and entities involved in
corruption in Venezuela that have been sanctioned since January 2021.
Answer. The United States has not levied sanctions or imposed visa
restrictions for significant corruption on individuals or entities in
Venezuela within that timeframe.
Question. What specific steps is the State Department taking to
target corrupt individuals and entities in Venezuela?
Answer. While we continue to assess information regarding corrupt
actors in Venezuela and throughout the region, the Department does not
share details of our deliberative process for sanctions or visa
restriction actions. We continue to review and assess any information
regarding officials' or entities' involvement in corrupt acts to
consider sanctions and accountability measures, where appropriate.
Question. What is State Department's plan to address money
laundering and illicit finance activities in Venezuela within the U.S.
Strategy on Countering Corruption?
Answer. The Department is working on several fronts to address
these issues. First, we continue to bolster implementation of
international anti-money laundering standards, including through the
Financial Action Task Force and other efforts. In addition, we are
utilizing foreign assistance resources to combat these challenges. The
Bureau of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs
facilitates regional dialogues to discuss methods and potential
evidence of money laundering through and out of Venezuela, including
but not limited to smuggling of gold, cryptocurrencies, and state-owned
enterprises. We are also engaging with civil society, the private
sector, and other non-governmental partners who are focused on
tracking, investigating, and reporting on money laundering and illicit
financial activities in Venezuela. Finally, the Department continually
reviews and assesses information on officials' involvement in corrupt
acts to consider additional sanctions and accountability measures,
where appropriate.
Question. What specific steps is the State Department taking to
persuade the EU to match U.S. sanctions until there is a credible
transition to democratic order in Venezuela?
Answer. Last year, Department officials engaged European
counterparts on Venezuela sanctions policy on multiple occasions.
Officials travelled to Madrid and Berlin to reinforce the importance of
the EU staying aligned with the United States on Venezuela sanctions
policy and maintaining EU sanctions on Venezuela. The EU renewed their
sanctions regime on Venezuela in late 2023. State continues to urge the
EU to remain aligned with the U.S. on Venezuela sanctions policy.
Question. What is the State Department's assessment of how much
revenue has dictator Maduro received since the November 2022 Chevron
sanctions relief?
Answer. We do not have reliable figures on the additional revenue
received by Maduro and the institutions he controls as a result of the
Chevron license due to the opacity surrounding PDVSA's operations.
Although we assess that the revenue generated from the Chevron license
was sufficient to prompt Maduro to proceed with signing the
humanitarian agreement in November 2022, our assessment is that the
impact from the license has been underwhelming compared to Maduro and
his representatives' expectations. Providing the Chevron license did
reduce Venezuela's use of Iranian diluents and enabled Chevron to
recoup debt owed by Venezuela.
Question. What is the latest impact assessment of the USG's foreign
policy of giving sanctions relief and corresponding revenue flows to
the Maduro regime?
Answer. As money has gone into the oil and gas sector, Venezuela
has slowly accrued some additional revenue. PDVSA's outstanding debt
obligations has limited the amount of revenue flowing to Venezuelan
institutions, as a sizable percentage goes for debt repayment.
Venezuela's oil and gas production is limited by persistent technical
and maintenance problems. Industry estimates note that Venezuela would
need about $100 billion and 10 years to restore its oil production
capacity to peak production levels. We retain the authority to amend or
revoke authorizations should Maduro and his representatives fail to
negotiate in good faith or follow through on their commitments.
Question. Please describe all programs and policies within the U.S.
Strategy on Countering Corruption that the State Department is using
specifically to counter the acts of significant corruption in the
Maduro regime.
Answer. We continue to engage with civil society, private sector,
and other non-governmental partners, along with international partners
to call out and counter corruption in Venezuela. Ongoing Department
initiatives include the Bureau of International Narcotics and Law
Enforcement Affairs' work to support regional law enforcement dialogues
to discuss methods and potential evidence of money laundering and other
illicit financial activities, as well as the Bureau of Democracy, Human
Rights and Labor's work to expose supranational grand corruption
networks originating in Venezuela and to seek accountability through
third-country mechanisms. The Department also continually reviews and
assesses information on officials' involvement in corrupt acts to
consider additional sanctions and accountability measures, where
appropriate.
Question. How is the State Department collaborating with the
Treasury Department in implementing Executive Order 13850, specifically
targeting corrupt individuals involved in Venezuela's gold sector or
any other sector of the Venezuelan economy?
Answer. The Treasury Department's Office of Foreign Assets Control
(OFAC) issued in October General License 43 authorizing dealings with
Minerven--the Venezuelan state-owned gold mining company. This license
was revoked in January due to noncompliance with the Barbados
agreement. The revoked license applies to both entities and
individuals.
OFAC also amended relevant licenses to remove the secondary trading
ban on certain Venezuelan sovereign bonds and PDVSA debt and equity.
This would have the positive effect of displacing nefarious actors in
this market with negligible financial benefit to the Venezuelan regime.
The ban on trading in the primary Venezuelan bond market remains.
As for Executive Order 13850, we collaborate with all relevant
interagency partners to see this is carried out in accordance with the
order.
Question. What specific actions is the State Department taking to
sanction corrupt government officials and other individuals or entities
in Mexico?
Answer. The Department does not share details of our deliberative
process for sanctions or visa restriction actions. We continue to
review and assess any information regarding officials' or entities'
involvement in corrupt acts to consider sanctions and accountability
measures, where appropriate.
Question. Please provide a list of corrupt government officials in
Mexico sanctioned since January 2021 and of other individuals or
entities sanctioned since January 2021.
Answer. The United States has not levied sanctions or imposed visa
restrictions for significant corruption on government officials in
Mexico within that timeframe.
Question. Please describe specific steps taken within the U.S.
Strategy on Countering Corruption to target corrupt individuals and
entities in Mexico facilitating the flow of fentanyl precursors?
Answer. The Department is undertaking several initiatives to
address these challenges, pursuant to our national strategy. The Bureau
of International and Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs (INL)
supports an effort through the International Narcotics Control Board's
Global Rapid Interdiction of Dangerous Substances program to implement
a chemical industry mapping exercise aiming to generate national
capacities and collaboration to protect industries from exploitation by
illicit drug manufacturers.
In addition, INL is working to strengthen Mexico's capacity to
investigate and prosecute corruption cases, including corruption
associated with the production and trafficking of fentanyl.
The Department also coordinates with OFAC on illicit drug sanctions
for those enabling the production and distribution of illicit drugs.
Through E.O. 14059, which in part implements the Fentanyl Sanctions
Act, the United States has sanctioned over 180 individual and entities
for enabling illicit fentanyl trafficking.
Question. What specific actions is the State Department taking to
sanction corrupt government officials in the government of President
Xiomara Castro in Honduras?
Answer. Since Castro took office in 2022, the Department has named
28 Hondurans to the Section 353 ``Corrupt and Undemocratic Actors''
list. Among those listed are a sitting minister in Castro's party,
other current and former government officials and legislators, and
party-affiliated businessmen.
Question. What specific actions is the State Department taking to
sanction corrupt government officials or other individuals or entities
in Bolivia?
Answer. The Department does not share details of our deliberative
process for sanctions or visa restriction actions. We continue to
review and assess any information regarding officials' or entities'
involvement in corrupt acts to consider sanctions and accountability
measures, where appropriate.
Question. What specific actions has the State Department taken to
communicate concerns to the Colombian Government about evidence of
corruption within the government of President Gustavo Petro?
Answer. The Department provides a wide range of support to the
Colombian Government's anti-corruption efforts, such as assistance to
help combat money laundering and support for prosecutors pursuing
complex public corruption cases. We recognize the strength and
professionalism of Colombian institutions and believe they are capable
of conducting ethical, transparent, and timely investigations into
allegations of public corruption. The Department does not comment on
private diplomatic conversations.
Question. Please outline the specific steps the State Department
has taken since January 2021 to target human smugglers in Latin America
and the Caribbean.
Answer. The Department supports a range of efforts to address
migrant smuggling in Latin America. The Bureau of International
Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs (INL) provides technical
assistance to regional partners to build their capacity to address the
threat of human smuggling and trafficking in persons. This programming
includes training and mentorship to justice sector officials and law
enforcement, to bring about more prosecutions and convictions against
human smugglers. INL also partners with DHS in an effort to establish a
modern biometrics system to better manage borders, identify security
threats, and develop a regional capability to identify and counter
human smuggling networks.
Question. How is the State Department implementing the U.S.
Strategy on Countering Corruption to target corrupt government
officials and other individual or entities in Latin America who are
facilitating human smuggling?
Answer. We continue to review and assess information regarding
officials' or entities involvement in corrupt acts, including as they
relate to human smuggling, to consider additional sanctions and
accountability measures, where appropriate.
Question. Please provide a list of all programs and policies within
the U.S. Strategy on Countering Corruption that are intended
specifically to combat corruption, anti-money laundering and illicit
finance in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Answer. The Department supports a range of efforts to counter these
threats. The Bureau of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement
Affairs (INL) works to strengthen institutions and the capacity of
partner nations to better identify and address the main drivers of
corruption and financial sector vulnerabilities. INL does so through
both regional and bilateral programming that accelerates countries'
implementation of international standards and treaties, provides
capacity building technical assistance to justice sector partners,
supports anti-corruption activists under threat, promotes civil society
engagement, and monitors key indicators of corruption. In addition, the
Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor supports civil society and
media organizations to investigate and expose grand corruption and
develop evidentiary support materials for consideration under various
sanction and visa restriction mechanisms in the United States and
internationally. The Department would be happy to provide more
information on these policies and programs in a secure setting.
Question. Concretely, what is your office doing to counter those
corrupt networks that exist on Russia's periphery and allow Russia to
procure the items it needs to run its war?
Answer. Our office coordinates with Department bureaus and offices
as well as interagency counterparts to ensure the United States is
countering corrupt networks that enable the Kremlin and other corrupt
actors. Broadly, the Department is deploying a range of tools in this
area, such as foreign assistance to partners investigating and
prosecuting these networks and other transnational crime organizations;
sanctions and sanctions evasions enforcement; visa restrictions; and
support for investigative journalists focused on these networks. The
President's December 2023 Proclamation on Suspension of Entry as
Immigrants and Nonimmigrants of Persons Enabling Corruption is one
example of how the Coordinator on Global Anti-Corruption team has
worked with the Department and interagency to expand our tools to
counter enablers.
Question. According to a 2022 report by the nonprofit Global
Financial Integrity, China's role in drug trafficking, counterfeiting
and IP theft, human trafficking, and wildlife trafficking is expanding
rapidly. How is the Administration working to counter China's growing
role in these networks, its facilitation of illicit financial flows,
and the associated corruption these activities produce?
Answer. The United States is addressing these challenges through
direct diplomatic engagement with the PRC, foreign assistance efforts
to bolster partner law enforcement capacity, and ongoing work to
promote accountability for corrupt actors. In January, the United
States and the PRC launched the U.S.-China Counternarcotics Working
Group to coordinate efforts to counter the trafficking of illicit
synthetic drugs, including fentanyl. The launch of the working group
marks a strong step towards implementing President Biden's and
President Xi Jinping's November 15 commitment to resume
counternarcotics cooperation. The PRC has begun taking steps to disrupt
the flow of chemicals and drugs to North America. We are clear-eyed and
will continue to work intensively, using all tools at our disposal, to
promote accountability and protect our communities.
To address the threat of IP theft and counterfeiting, some of which
stems from the PRC, the Bureau of International Narcotics and Law
Enforcement funds two Department of Justice attorney advisors in Asia.
These advisors work to strengthen the capacity of law enforcement
authorities throughout the region to help enforce intellectual property
rights and combat cybercrime.
In addition, INL supports counter wildlife trafficking programming
in the PRC, including efforts to bolster information-sharing between
the PRC and countries along major illicit supply routes for wildlife,
and to strengthen the PRC's legislative and regulatory frameworks on
wildlife crime.
The Department also continues to use all tools available, including
accountability tools, to address environmental corruption. For example,
in August 2023, the Department designated three former DRC government
officials under Section 7031(c) due to significant corruption that
enabled wildlife trafficking from the DRC, primarily to the People's
Republic of China, using falsified permits, in return for bribes.
Question. What is the Administration doing with respect to Hong
Kong's role as a facilitator for money laundering, corruption, and
sanctions evasion in light of China's success in destroying its
autonomy under the National Security Law?
Answer. FBI, DOJ, DEA, DHS, Treasury, and IRS personnel in Hong
Kong are working to combat transnational crime in the region through
information-sharing focused on drug trafficking, the transshipment of
fentanyl and its precursors, human and wildlife trafficking, illicit
finance, counterfeit goods, visa fraud and counterfeit documents fraud,
and other unlawful trade. Through the Departments of Commerce and
Treasury, Post engages with local authorities on compliance with U.S.
sanctions and export controls in Hong Kong, which is a major
transshipment hub for goods sourced from countries under sanctions,
such as Russia, or which are regulated by export controls, such as
sensitive technologies bound for the PRC.
Question. How does your office work with the Office of the
Sanctions Coordinator to deploy anti-corruption sanctions and visa
restrictions?
Answer. Our office engages the Office of the Sanctions Coordinator,
and relevant offices responsible for specific sanctions, such as Global
Magnitsky anti-corruption sanctions, on policy formulation related to
processes we use to deploy a range of sanctions tools. We also
coordinate on outreach to foreign partners and on public messaging and
follow-up to sanctions, including how we can leverage other tools such
as diplomatic engagement or foreign assistance to complement sanctions.
Regarding visa restrictions, we coordinate with the Bureau of
International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs, which manages the
Department's visa restriction authorities related to anti-corruption.
Question. The diamond trade is a global business, which has only
come into more focus after Russia's invasion of Ukraine. Where do you
see corruption, if at all, the most prevalent in the global diamond
trade? Do you have any recommendations to combat such corruption?
Answer. The Department assesses corruption to be a concern in the
global diamond trade, which the Financial Action Task Force documented
in its last typology of the diamond trade in 2013. Corruption appears
to contribute to concerns in the diamond trade in many areas, from
valuation to use of fraudulent documentation to sanctions evasion. The
Department has pursued a multi-pronged approach to address these
challenges. First, the United States participates in the Kimberley
Process, an international, multi-stakeholder initiative created to
increase transparency and oversight in the diamond supply chain in
order to eliminate trade in conflict diamonds. In addition, the
Department supports the efforts of G7 allies to implement new
restrictions on finished diamonds, which we assess improve transparency
in the diamond trade. Finally, the Department, through the INL bureau,
supports foreign assistance efforts to help identify, track, and
disrupt the trafficking and use of precious stones and metals related
to illicit finance and trade-based money laundering.
______
Responses of Mr. Richard Nephew to Questions
Submitted by Senator Tim Kaine
Question. Although there are 190 parties to the United Nations
Convention Against Corruption (UNCAC), which requires them to have laws
criminalizing varying forms of corruption, corrupt kleptocrats have
impunity in their own countries because they control the police,
prosecutors, and courts. An International Anti-Corruption Court (IACC),
as has been proposed by government transparency and accountability
organizations in the United States and elsewhere, could fill the
crucial enforcement gap in the international framework for combatting
state-level (``grand'') corruption. It could constitute a fair and
effective forum for the prosecution and punishment of kleptocrats and
their collaborators; deter others tempted to emulate their example; and
recover, repatriate, and repurpose ill-gotten gains for the victims of
grand corruption. The idea is garnering growing international support.
Please restate for the record the Department's position on the
creation of an International Anti-Corruption Court.
Answer. The United States is not supportive of the proposal for
such a court. While we are very supportive of strengthening efforts to
increase accountability and combat impunity, we do not think the
proposed court is an effective mechanism to achieve this. In fact, we
think that it could hinder existing efforts to investigate and
prosecute corrupt actors.
We have several concerns about such a court, including the proposed
cost, barriers to effective operation, and the potential for it to
become overly politicized. Such a court could also potentially
undermine ongoing U.S. corruption-related prosecutions. We think
efforts and resources would be much better placed to support national
anti-corruption bodies to prosecute their own cases and/or support
existing mechanisms that foster international cooperation on major
corruption cases.
Our position is that the best way for countries to fight impunity
is for all of us to prosecute our own cases and vigorously support
other countries in their own prosecutions via mutual legal assistance
and other forms of bilateral or multilateral support. Several other
countries and many in civil society have expressed similar positions.
Question. Under what circumstances could the United States
Government support the creation of an IACC--or at minimum, refrain from
opposing the creation of an IACC to allow others to move forward on
this effort, even while the U.S. remains a neutral non-party to the
Court?
Answer. As noted above, the United States does not support the
proposal for an International Anti-Corruption Court under any
circumstances. As an alternative, we would encourage countries to
implement strong accountability measures, such as anti-corruption
sanctions and visa denials; to consider adoption of passive bribery
statutes and institute strong anti-money laundering regimes; and to
support and work through existing multi-lateral institutions. If more
countries had such authorities in place, and they were implemented,
corrupt actors would have a much harder time hiding and enjoying the
proceeds of their crimes.
______
Responses of Mr. Richard Nephew to Questions
Submitted by Senator Pete Ricketts
Question. Pillar Three of the United States Strategy on Countering
Corruption focuses on holding corrupt actors accountable. During the
hearing, you acknowledged that the Palestinian Authority's corruption
has been longstanding.
What specific corrupt activities does the State Department believe
the Palestinian Authority or Palestinian Authority officials have
engaged in?
Answer. The Department has consistently pressed Palestinian
Authority (PA) leaders to reform and improve the PA's governance so
that it can effectively support the Palestinian people's aspirations.
The Secretary has been engaged with the PA leadership on the need for
revitalization, reform, and anti-corruption efforts; a senior team
continues to engage Ramallah on this.
While Transparency International, which the Department relies on
for the data in our Investment Climate Statement, does not rank the
West Bank and Gaza Strip, the Statement and the recent Human Rights
Report note that corruption there is on par with corrupt practices of
the region. Specifically, the Palestinian public views favoritism as
the most common form of corruption.
Question. Have Palestinian Authority officials, including President
Abbas, engaged in embezzlement?
Answer. The Department monitors and reports on a wide range of
issues and activities related to corruption, including in relation to
the Palestinian Authority. We are regularly engaging Palestinian
Authority officials on the need for reform and combatting corruption.
Question. Have Palestinian Authority officials, including President
Abbas, engaged in nepotism?
Answer. As noted in the Department's Human Rights Report and
Investment Climate Statement, allegations of favoritism and nepotism in
public sector appointments have been widespread in the Palestinian
Authority. The Department will continue engagement with the Palestinian
Authority on the need to undertake reform and revitalization to best
serve the Palestinian people.
Question. Between December 2021, when the anti-corruption strategy
was released, and Hamas' barbaric attack against Israel on October 7,
2023, did the Biden administration take any direct actions to hold
Palestinian Authority officials accountable for corrupt activities?
Answer. Accountability tools, such as sanctions and visa
restrictions, are just one part of a whole-of-government approach to
promote accountability of corrupt officials. While these tools have not
been deployed in this timeframe for Palestinian officials for corrupt
activities, the Department is regularly and at the highest levels
engaging with the Palestinian Authority on the need for reforms to
improve governance.
Question. If so, what specific actions were taken?
Answer. Senior U.S. officials, including the Secretary of State,
have consistently engaged with the Palestinian Authority leadership on
the need to reform and to address corruption.
Question. Which Palestinian Authority officials were held
accountable?
Answer. The Administration has not sanctioned or imposed visa
restrictions on Palestinian officials for significant corruption in
this timeframe.
Question. On what dates were those actions taken?
Answer. The Administration has not sanctioned or imposed visa
restrictions on Palestinian officials for significant corruption in
this timeframe.
Question. If no direct actions were taken during this time period,
why?
Answer. Visa restrictions and sanctions are one part of a larger
set of tools the Department uses to fight corruption, including
diplomatic engagement. The Department continues to engage Palestinian
Authority officials on the need to reform, including through increasing
transparency in governance and combatting corruption.
Additionally, while the Department does not comment on specific
cases, we welcome any credible information your office would like to
provide on current or former government officials' involvement in
significant corruption.
Question. According to the White House's March 29, 2023 fact sheet
on implementation of the United States Strategy on Countering
Corruption, the Biden administration has ``taken decisive measures to
hold corrupt actors accountable through both independent and
coordinated action with our international partners.'' It goes on to
say, the ``Treasury Department designated dozens of individuals and
entities for their involvement in corruption, including current or
former officials in Central America, Africa, the Western Balkans, and
Eastern Europe. If corruption has been a problem for the Palestinian
Authority for a number years, which you testified to, why haven't
similar designations been made for the Palestinian Authority or
Palestinian Authority officials for engaging in similar behavior?
Answer. Sanctions and visa restrictions are highly fact and
context-specific, and the Department works with our embassies, the
interagency, and civil society to gather and analyze relevant
information regarding impact. The Department continually reviews and
assesses information on officials' involvement in corrupt acts. While
the Department does not comment on specific cases, we welcome any
credible information your office would like to provide on current or
former government officials' involvement in significant corruption.
Question. During the hearing, you said, ``We have been, through a
variety of different programs at different points and times, attempting
to improve the accountability systems of the Palestinian Authority, as
well as to improve their own ability to manage resources and so forth.
Those activities and programs have, in some cases, had some
successes.'' Can you provide specific examples of those efforts and
explain what successes were achieved?
Answer. To broadly promote accountability and responsive
governance, the Bureau of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement
(INL) will provide training and other technical assistance to justice
sector actors, including prosecutors and courts, as well as to the
Financial Follow-up Unit. INL's assistance will enable effective
prosecution of crimes to include financial corruption, as well as
delivery of transparent, and efficient, services to the Palestinian
public to increase their confidence in the justice system.
The Department will continue to engage in the diplomatic space for
greater measures of trusted and accountable governance structures. This
will be a linchpin of the post conflict environment and critical to any
successful reform of the Palestinian Authority.
______
Responses of Ms. Shannon Green to Questions
Submitted by Senator James E. Risch
Question. Ukraine: President Zelensky has been clear that Ukraine
is fighting two wars--one against Putin and one against corruption.
Anti-corruption will be key to ensure Ukraine's eventual reconstruction
is successful. What is your office doing to help build uncorrupt
institutions in Ukraine now, and to help them defend against the future
infiltration of corrupt actors like China?
Answer. USAID is taking a multi-pronged approach to assist Ukraine
with anti-corruption efforts through our support to Ukrainian anti-
corruption institutions and work with Ukrainian civil society
organizations and the media. The U.S. has helped Ukraine establish a
robust anti-corruption ecosystem, including the National Agency on
Corruption Prevention (NACP), the civilian agency responsible for
corruption prevention and policy, and the High Anti-Corruption Court
(HACC), the specialized court responsible for adjudicating high-value
corruption cases. Together with the National Anti-Corruption Bureau and
the Specialized Anti-Corruption Prosecutor's Office (SAPO), these
organizations provide the broad institutional basis for investigating,
prosecuting, and holding to account corrupt actors. With other U.S.
Government partners, USAID has helped ensure international expert and
civil society involvement in the selection of HACC judges, as well as
in the full reboot of Ukraine's judicial self-governance bodies with
new, vetted membership. These entities are responsible for advancing
judicial selection and accountability by filling over 2,000 vacant
judgeships and addressing a backlog of 10,000 disciplinary complaints--
processes essential to delivering the rule of law that Ukrainians
expect, and that is essential to further private sector investment in
Ukraine's recovery.
USAID also helped establish Ukraine's electronic asset declaration
system, a critical tool for addressing public sector corruption and
verifying the integrity of officials. USAID also helped the NACP to
develop the PolitData political party finance and spending reporting
portal, and a whole-of-government Whistleblower Reporting Portal for
corruption reporting and whistleblower protection, and the National
Anti-Corruption Strategy for 2021-2025. USAID helped create the first
anti-corruption master's degree program in Europe at the renowned Kyiv
Mohyla Academy to prepare the next generation of anti-corruption
advocates.
USAID support to ProZorro, an e-procurement government system, has
helped back-up and secure public procurement data to the cloud and
ensure the uninterrupted functioning of the e-Procurement platform
during martial law. ProZorro remains a highly successful tool against
corruption, as a means of broadening businesses' participation in
government procurement, and as a reminder of transparency's importance
in reinforcing confidence in government. To date, ProZorro has saved
Ukrainian taxpayers an estimated $9 billion by eliminating corruption
in public procurement processes.
USAID works with local civil society to support anti-corruption
watchdog and advocacy organizations, including prominent organizations
such as AntAC, Transparency International--Ukraine, and DEJURE, to
support key anti-corruption reforms for Ukraine's EU integration. Other
support includes monitoring and oversight of political finance, which
has long been an entry point for corruption in political processes, and
support to investigative journalism to expose corrupt activities,
including prominent outlets like Slidstvo and Nashi Groshi.
USAID also employs its development expertise, investments, and
tools to deliver essential development outcomes while increasing
Ukraine's independence from and resilience to the authoritarian
influence of the PRC and other similar actors. These efforts are aimed
at (1) advancing the transparent management of natural resources, (2)
realizing the promise of an open and secure digital ecosystem, (3)
strengthening democratic institutions and the rule of law, and (4)
increasing the economic resilience of Ukraine so that they can more
effectively rebuff external coercion. Across these areas, USAID
emphasizes the importance of deepening public and private sector
partnerships and the critical role of strategic communications.
Question. How can U.S. companies be assured that their investments
in Ukraine's reconstruction will be protected against corruption?
Answer. Ukraine's success and independence is not only being fought
on the battlefields. For Ukraine to win the war and the future, it
needs to build a strong economy, grow the private sector while fighting
corruption, and become a part of the European Union (EU). USAID
supports this vision--not just because we share values with a free and
democratic Ukraine, but also because it is important to the U.S. that
Ukraine is a strong partner. In our development strategy for Ukraine,
reforms are a critical component in our development objectives,
including sector reforms, to achieve our overarching goal of building a
self-reliant, thriving, and healthy Ukraine that aligns with European
values.
We and our Ukrainian partners understand that economic recovery
will require robust involvement from the private sector, and companies
will seek risk mitigation, anti-corruption, law enforcement reform,
transparency in government tenders, and consistent enforcement of the
rule of law. Accordingly, strengthening the independence and capacity
of anti-corruption infrastructure, law enforcement agencies and
judicial institutions, and de-oligarchization of the energy and mining
sectors, is essential to helping Ukraine win the future, in addition to
the war. Our shared objectives depend on the completion of the reform
agenda, and we have used conditionality to further press for progress
on these reforms. USAID has worked closely with the interagency to
inform key reform priorities, which have been shared with the
Government of Ukraine, and are the basis for the Conditionality
Framework for the next tranche of U.S. direct budget support (DBS).
These priority reforms, subject to conditionality, include
strengthening anti-corruption institutions as well as customs reform.
Likewise, Ukraine's other international partners understand the
critical connection between Ukraine's economic recovery and its reform
agenda. In June 2022, the EU granted Ukraine candidate status.
Additionally, in December 2023, after assessing that Ukraine had made
sufficient progress on seven reform priorities, the European Council
decided to open accession negotiations with Ukraine. In a further sign
of confidence, in February 2024 the European Council approved a Ukraine
facility for =50 billion, which according to the EU is intended to help
Ukraine with stable financial support during the conflict ($54.58
billion).
Moreover, the 4-year, $15.6 billion IMF Extended Fund Facility
(EFF) Program for Ukraine mandates structural benchmarks or conditions
which include maintaining needed fiscal expenditures, while avoiding
erosion of tax revenues; supporting disinflation and exchange rate
stability and implementing essential governance and anti-corruption
reforms. At the program's third review in February 2024, the IMF
concluded that Ukraine had met all but one quantitative performance
criteria and all structural benchmarks underscoring their continuing
commitment to an ambitious reform agenda.
Question. Coordination: How does USAID work with the State
Department to ensure that anti-corruption programming is coordinated
and not duplicative?
Answer. USAID is working closely with interagency partners to
implement the U.S. Strategy on Countering Corruption. This is
especially true of our work with the Department of State, including the
Coordinator on Global Anti-Corruption.
USAID and the Department of State have increased our joint planning
and further integrated our work, including the resources and tools that
we can bring to bear on corruption challenges at country, regional, and
global levels. We have increased our joint efforts to coordinate
assistance with other bilateral and multilateral donors and jointly
engage on strategic planning processes. Headquarters staff coordinate
on centrally managed funding, while Posts convene interagency anti-
corruption working groups to ensure a complementary approach at the
country level.
As an example, the State Department's Coordinator on Global Anti-
Corruption Richard Nephew and USAID Assistant to the Administrator
Shannon Green traveled together in 2023 to Liberia, where they
encouraged senior government officials to undertake urgent and
persistent actions to address severe corruption risk, especially in the
health and extractives sectors. Their joint engagements also show
solidarity with anti-corruption bodies, civil society, and other
reformers who are championing anti-corruption improvements.
USAID and the Department of State collaborate on key issues that
promote anti-corruption measures, such as the effective use of
beneficial ownership data and integrity in public procurement and
addressing the enablers of corruption. For example, USAID and the
Department of State co-led a multi-stakeholder platform, together with
the Brookings Institution and the Open Government Partnership, to
accelerate uptake of priority reforms to address the vulnerabilities in
the international financial system that allow corrupt actors to hide,
launder, and transfer their ill-gotten gains around the world. The
State Department and USAID also collaborate closely on participation in
multilateral gatherings, ensuring a coordinated approach and messaging,
including the International Anti-Corruption Conference, the United
Nations Convention against Corruption Conference of States Parties, and
the Open Government Partnership Summit.
Question. Western Hemisphere: You referenced a program in Latin
America and the Caribbean, an investigative journalism initiative
supported by USAID and the Department of State which produced over 200
high impact investigative pieces and arrests. Are there plans to expand
this program to other countries? Please provide the list of the high
impact pieces.
Answer. The program referenced here was the Investigative Reporting
Initiative of the Americas (also known as PROSAFE), implemented by the
International Center for Journalists, and concluded in August 2023.
USAID is building upon that work in a variety of ways.
In 2023, USAID launched the Central America Regional Media Project
(ReMedios). ReMedios protects and strengthens independent media in
Central America to generate initiatives and journalistic content to
expose corruption and increase public demand for government
transparency and accountability. Through our elections-related
programming in Central America, we also support independent journalists
and outlets to report on electoral processes and outcomes.
Latin America and the Caribbean is not the only region where USAID
is investing in strengthening the investigative journalism networks
needed to shine a light on corruption that often crosses borders. In
September 2022, USAID launched the Strengthening Transparency and
Accountability through Investigative Reporting Program (STAIR) to
support networks of media outlets working to expose crime, corruption,
and corrosive capital across the Europe and Eurasia region; foster
their organizational and financial viability; and develop safety and
security measures to protect investigative journalists who may face
reprisals for their efforts to report the truth. USAID's Empowering the
Truth Tellers activities build on this effort, supporting regional
journalism in Southeast Asia and Southern Africa and amplifying its
potential to expose and fight corruption and strengthen democracy.
To preserve the independence of the journalists and pieces they
develop, USAID does not play a role in selecting the journalists and
outlets involved, the articles that are developed, nor where they are
published. As part of our regular project monitoring and evaluation
processes, we know the pieces developed with our support and track the
follow-on impacts but we do not disclose that information publicly,
again to preserve the independence of that work.
Some illustrative examples of the articles developed under PROSAFE
include:
a journalism investigation that exposed judges in two
Ecuadorian provinces issuing sentences that violated the law
and benefitted accused drug traffickers. A number of the judges
identified were investigated for malfeasance and illicit
association. The investigation was further publicized by
several television stations and a radio station.
a journalism investigation into the awarding of contracts in
the Mexican energy sector revealed inappropriate relationships
between a winning contractor and high level officials.
Following publication of the article, Mexico's Federal
Electricity Commission indicated it would take legal action
against the contractor, and the then-President of Mexico
addressed the issue at a press conference. The investigation
was also cited, mentioned, or republished by 20 other media
outlets.
Question. Please provide more information as to which countries
from Latin America are in USAID's 12th Grand Challenge, and what are
the innovations you are seed funding?
Answer. USAID's Countering Transnational Corruption Grand Challenge
for Development (CTC Grand Challenge) is global in scope and supports a
variety of innovation activities each year. To date, we are supporting
solutions in the Latin America and Caribbean Region under two of the
CTC Grand Challenge activities.
First, under the Powering a Just Energy Transition Green Minerals
Challenge (JET Minerals Challenge):
In Chile, Talisman International will receive nearly $50,000
to scope an easily accessible, free data platform that supports
due diligence in the lithium value chain by highlighting
corruption risks. It will allow companies to assess their value
chains for corruption and incentivize them to take action to
eliminate it, while also providing government agencies with the
data to recalibrate and enforce anti-corruption policies. This
pilot project will test ideas and conduct data modeling focused
on the extraction of lithium in Chile, serving as a proof of
concept that could be applied in other countries and for other
green minerals.
Transparency International Australia (TIA) will receive
approximately $400,000 to refine its Responsible Mining
Business Integrity tool, which was originally developed in
collaboration with companies and international mining
governance institutions in 2020. TIA will work with other
Transparency International in-country chapters to pilot the
updated tool with up to 25 mining companies in Argentina and
Colombia, as well as Indonesia, Zambia, and Zimbabwe, to
identify corruption risks and strengthen their integrity and
anti-corruption standards. This innovation will increase
knowledge and collaboration between civil society and mining
industry stakeholders, promote business integrity practices,
and improve anti-corruption capabilities within the private
sector.
Second, USAID, along with the State Department's International
Narcotics and Law Enforcement Bureau (INL), funded a LAC regional
hackathon in August 2023. USAID is supporting three solutions from the
hackathon:
I-KEEP: An open web platform for making data in public
procurement more accessible in Paraguay and across the region;
Caja Publica: A web application about beneficial owners and
state contracting in Colombia; and
Ojo a las Sanciones: A database of sanctioned and suspended
actors and relevant tax records in Mexico.
Question. You noted USAID is focused on providing timely and
targeted assistance to seize opportunities for anti-corruption reform
or stanch backsliding when it begins. What programs is USAID focused on
in Latin America this year?
Answer. In Central America, USAID has taken a number of steps to
take advantage of reform opportunities and to build a bulwark against
attacks on democracy. For example:
In Guatemala, USAID worked in the run up to the June 2023
elections to ensure a robust independent election monitoring
effort. This effort was important to ensure the will of the
Guatemalan people was respected in the election outcome.
Through the lengthy transition period, USAID promoted dialogue
among representatives from Indigenous communities, the private
sector, and civil society organizations to foster a coordinated
approach to protecting the election outcomes. Following the
inauguration of President Arevalo, USAID has worked to
strengthen entities essential to advancing an anti-corruption
agenda. These include the National Anti-Corruption Commission,
the internal affairs offices of select ministries, and
congressional committees that play an important role in a
reform agenda. USAID is also providing robust support to ensure
civil society organizations (CSOs) continue to play a critical
oversight role. The current processes to elect new Supreme
Court and appellate court magistrates are particularly
important to Guatemala's democratic trajectory. All of these
efforts build upon USAID's long-standing democracy, human
rights, and governance work in the country, ensuring we were
well positioned to be responsive to the Arevalo
administration's reform agenda.
USAID's Anti-Corruption Policy highlights the need to tackle
transnational corruption. In response to the Policy and to
feedback from independent media and local civil society
organizations across Central America, USAID has launched two
complementary regional activities within the past year,
reinforcing ongoing bilateral programming. Together, these
activities empower independent media, civil society
organizations, and other defenders to track and expose
corruption and foster accountability through cross-border
collaboration, networking, and learning; capacity building; the
provision of resources; and protection support, including
digital and physical security, legal and psychosocial
assistance, and relocation assistance if and when conditions
become too unsafe for these actors to continue their work.
In the Caribbean, USAID has taken a number of steps to take
advantage of reform opportunities and push back against attacks on
democracy. For example:
The Dominican Republic will host the Summit of the Americas
in 2025, adding renewed interest and political will within the
Government of the Dominican Republic (GODR) to showcase
democratic results. Within the next 10 months, USAID/DR will
complete the Partnership for Democratic Development (PDD)
activity design and procurement process, financed by the
Presidential Initiative for Democratic Renewal, focused on
anti-corruption, and formally launch the new activity in
partnership with the GODR. Simultaneously, the Procurement
Transparency Activity (PTA), implemented by the Commercial Law
Development Program (CLDP), will continue advancing its
successful work with the public procurement regulatory
framework to prevent corruption in the GoDR's public
procurements.
In South America, USAID has taken a number of steps to stanch
backsliding and strengthen democratic resilience. For example:
In Paraguay, the Partnerships for Democratic Development
(PDD) initiative supports civil society organizations and will
soon work with investigative journalists to monitor and report
on corruption. PDD also works with government reform champions
to develop policies making it easier for entrepreneurs to
legally register their businesses, avoiding susceptibility to
criminal elements which control Paraguay's informal economy and
contribute to national level corruption. Formalization of the
economy and economic good governance remain a sector open to
democratic reform, and one of the few legitimate sectors USAID
can support Paraguayan reformers to institutionalize democratic
functions, thereby helping to staunch backsliding before it
expands.
In Ecuador USAID's PDD initiative also funds the Tu
Municipio Responde, ``Your Municipality Responds,'' program.
Known as TuMuni, this program works with the Government of
Ecuador, local governments, civil society, the private sector,
and other stakeholders to strengthen the capacity of
municipalities' governance operations, including public
financial management, revenue generation, and provision of
public services in 30 participating municipalities across the
country. Strengthening democratic processes and local public
services builds citizen's trust in government by demonstrating
that democratic governance produces results.
Question. Please provide more information on the U.S. Government
Voices Initiative in Central America, part of the Administration's Root
Causes Strategy to counter corruption and improve investigative
journalism. What goals have been reached by the four countries in the
first 6 months of the program? Please provide detailed information on
the initiatives for the countries selected for this program. (initial
announcement found here: https://www.usaid.gov/news-information/press-
releases/sep-26-2023-usaid-announces-regional-anti-corruption-media-
initiative-central-america-donors-forum).
Answer. Administrator Power launched the interagency Voices
initiative in June 2022 at the Summit of the Americas. The initiative
has three pillars focused on promoting digital democracy and countering
digital authoritarianism; promoting freedom of expression and
strengthening independent media; and providing protection to
individuals targeted, such as judicial operators, human rights
defenders, and anti-corruption champions.
Efforts under the Voices initiative have included several
consultations with civil society organizations and public and private
events in Washington, DC and across the Central America region, as well
as efforts to coordinate assistance responding to civic space in the
region among philanthropic organizations and multilateral and bilateral
donors.
New activities launched under this initiative across Guatemala,
Honduras, El Salvador, and Nicaragua have advanced USAID's localization
efforts through both direct and indirect support to local
organizations, regional journalists, and CSO networks protecting
freedom of expression and defending human rights. They also provide
judicial operators, human rights defenders, and anti-corruption
champions under threat with protection assistance, including physical
and digital protection services; psychosocial support; legal advice;
and, if necessary, relocation support.
Under the Regional Human Rights and Democracy activity implemented
by the Pan American Development Foundation, USAID has addressed
critical protection needs for human rights defenders, including digital
and physical security, relocation and psychosocial support, and legal
assistance. For example, since January 2024, through bilateral and
regional programs, USAID responded to 15 requests for emergency support
from Salvadoran journalists who decided to leave the country over
concerns about their safety.
To respond to regional trends impacting civil society organizations
and independent media, USAID has also launched new regional activities:
For example, a Central America media regional activity
called ReMedios, was launched in July 2023 and focuses on
protecting and strengthening independent media in Central
America to expose corruption and increase public demand for
government transparency and accountability.
We also launched a new 5-year $8 million activity that will
provide 2-year fellowship opportunities at U.S. universities
for democracy activists, human rights defenders, and
anticorruption champions from El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras,
and Nicaragua. These opportunities will allow them to continue
to engage on these critical issues from a safe place abroad.
Question. Please provide updates on the Doing Business with
Integrity program announced in Sept. 2023. Which projects have been
awarded and how much money has been spent?
Answer. USAID received 100 concept notes through Doing Business
with Integrity. The most promising concepts have completed co-creation
sessions and are at various stages in the final application phase
including both full application submission, review, and due diligence
processes. USAID has not issued any awards to date, but we anticipate
making initial awards as early as May 2024.
Question. On March 15, 2024, Ecuador's Attorney General's Office
presented evidence against 13 suspects in the so-called Metastasis Case
(Caso Metastasis), which Attorney General Diana Salazar described as
the largest in Ecuador's history against corruption and drug
trafficking. What is USAID doing to support Ecuador's efforts against
corruption?
Answer. USAID currently has ongoing anti-corruption programming in
Ecuador. The Promoting Anti-Corruption Efforts (PACE) Program
implemented in partnership with the Pan-American Development Foundation
(PADF) started in October 2021 and will end in September 2024, with a
total estimated cost of $3.5 million. The activity has developed seven
citizen-driven observation processes, producing 29 reports on major
corruption cases in the country, particularly in the energy,
infrastructure, and telecommunications sectors. For example, one of the
reports that triggered an investigation was that of inflated salaries
at the national telecommunications and electricity companies. The
Ministry of Labor is now revising these contracts and aims to start a
salary renegotiation that aligns with government expenditure ceilings.
Similarly, over 15 investigative reports have also been produced on
issues affecting the salaries, expenditure limits, and contract
negotiation. One investigation reviewed $3.6 million of profits per
month that an organized criminal group received from managing up to 20
illegal mining sites and extorting legal companies in over 30 mining
projects around the country. This at a time when authorities are
investigating the operations and funding sources of criminal groups,
particularly through the insecurity crisis the country is facing.
Question. How is USAID collaborating with civil society
organizations and our international partners to combat corruption in
Latin America and the Caribbean?
Answer. USAID has collaborated with civil society organizations to
combat corruption in Latin America and the Caribbean, including in
various countries and through regional and bilateral programming.
In Honduras, USAID supports the National Anti-Corruption Council
(CNA) to strengthen CNA's technical and organizational capacity and its
ability to work with state institutions to prevent, detect,
investigate, and prosecute corruption cases. CNA supports transparency
by helping with the investigation of key corruption cases and publicly
monitoring their progress within the judicial processes. With USAID's
support, CNA has presented over 150 investigations that involve over
1,700 Government of Honduras officials. USAID also supports FOSDEH, a
local anti-corruption organization to influence public policy, provide
oversight, and collaborate with relevant stakeholders to improve
transparency and accountability across the public and private sectors.
In Mexico, USAID has supported journalists' ability to produce
responsible, well-sourced, and original investigative reporting that
exposes corruption and promotes transparency and accountability in
targeted northern Mexican border states and municipalities.
In response to feedback from independent media and local civil
society organizations across Central America, USAID has launched two
Central America complementary regional activities within the past year,
reinforcing ongoing bilateral programming. Together, these activities
empower independent media, civil society organizations, and other
defenders to track and expose corruption and foster accountability
through cross-border collaboration, networking, and learning; capacity
building; the provision of resources; and protection support, including
digital and physical security, legal and psychosocial assistance, and
relocation assistance if and when conditions become too unsafe for
these actors to continue their work.
Question. What role does public education and awareness play in the
fight against corruption in the region?
Answer. Civil society organizations (CSO) and anti-corruption
champions play an important role in documenting, investigating, and
raising awareness with the broader public about anti-corruption efforts
through research, networking, and training efforts. Independent media
outlets also play a critical role in educating the public about
corruption through investigative reporting.
As a part of USAID support to the National Anti-Corruption Council
(CNA) in Honduras, CNA works to raise awareness among the Honduran
public about the impact of corruption and to build the capacity of
lawyers to combat corruption. USAID's Honduran partner, FOSDEH,
documents transparency and accountability across private and public
sectors to influence public policy.
Two new Central America regional activities launched within the
past year will also contribute to awareness-raising on corruption in
the region by empowering independent media, civil society
organizations, and other defenders to track and expose corruption and
foster accountability through cross-border collaboration, networking,
learning, and capacity building. By building regional CSO networks,
organizations share information and documentation of transnational
corruption cases and work with independent media to highlight cases
with national and international audiences.
In the Dominican Republic, for example, as part of the Partnership
for Democratic Development activity design process, the Mission
completed five plenary consultations and two validation workshops with
representatives from government, civil society, and the private sector
to identify key development challenges and prospective solutions to
advance democratic resilience through anti-corruption initiatives.
Involving civil society is seen as critical for oversight and
accountability of anti-corruption initiatives, as well as identifying
corruption. Through USAID's Procurement Transparency Activity (PTA),
business associations representing women-owned businesses and micro-
small and medium enterprises are being instructed in the Government of
the Dominican Republic's public procurement process and how to report
corruption. USAID/DR's work with civil society and media is building
their capacity to educate and raise awareness of corruption and
violence to combat illegal activities that undermine democratic
institutions and practices.
Question. Please describe how USAID prioritizes its anti-corruption
efforts in the region, particularly considering the diverse political
and social landscapes across Latin America and the Caribbean? You
mentioned elections is an important consideration this year, given the
many elections. Is that part of the prioritization list?
Answer. USAID Missions develop their development priorities through
individual, country-specific 5-year Country Development Cooperation
Strategies (CDCSs). Through analysis and knowledge of context on the
ground, many of the Latin American and Caribbean (LAC) Bureau Missions
have highlighted corruption issues in their CDCSs as major impediments
to development and have developed programs to address those gaps. In
addition, the Democracy, Human Rights, and Governance (DRG) Bureau
works with USAID Missions to prioritize countries for additional
funding from the Presidential Initiative for Democratic Renewal focused
on anti-corruption. The DRG Bureau does consider which countries are
holding elections this year as part of its strategic planning and
potential resource allocation, but that is not the sole deciding
factor. For instance, if supporting anti-corruption initiatives in a
country has a potential to advance the democratic environment around an
upcoming election, that could be a factor to consider. In addition, if
an electoral process provides openings for enhanced anti-corruption
efforts and impact, that may also be a factor.
The DRG Bureau also supports countries in the LAC region through
the Anti-Corruption Response Fund (ACRF). The ACRF's primary objective
is to enable USAID to support countries experiencing an anti-corruption
reform opening, backsliding, or an opportunity for experimentation.
These responses may be rapid if the situation merits it or allow the
Agency the flexibility to pilot new means of achieving anti-corruption
outcomes. For example, in Paraguay, ACRF supports efforts to address a
clear opening to counter corruption and implement new anti-corruption
directions in line with the USAID Anti-Corruption Policy. This includes
funding for a local non-governmental organization to provide oversight
of the conflict of interest (COI) law; support to the Comptroller's
office in the implementation of the COI law; and support to strengthen
oversight by the Comptroller.
Question. Given the challenges posed by corruption, what strategies
does USAID employ to ensure the sustainability of its anti-corruption
efforts in the region beyond the duration of specific projects or
programs?
Answer. Ensuring sustainability of anti-corruption efforts depends
foremost on inclusion of civil society and independent media as well as
strengthening institutions. Civil society provides oversight and
accountability for anti-corruption efforts and mobilizes its base to
demand accountability from public officials. Strong, independent media
plays a crucial role through investigative journalism and presenting
news in a manner citizens can easily understand. Strengthening the
technical skills of government officials charged with limiting
corruption is important and working with governments on reducing
incentives and making corruption more difficult also lead to sustained
gains.
Question. What challenges does USAID encounter in implementing
anti-corruption programs in Latin America and the Caribbean, and how
does the agency mitigate these challenges to achieve its objectives?
Answer. USAID's work to combat corruption inherently opposes the
interests of corrupt actors and those who stand to gain power and
resources through corruption. Examples of best practices in mitigating
these challenges to anti-corruption programs involve including civil
society in the work, identifying agents of change/leaders in the
government and private sector who will support and advocate for the
anti-corruption program, and working with media to create awareness of
the corruption issues and the anti-corruption efforts/progress.
Transnational corruption cases require transnational and cross-
sectoral approaches. USAID has responded by increasing its regional
programming in Central America to support cross-border networks of CSOs
and independent media to expose corruption, document and highlight
specific corruption cases with national and international stakeholders.
Supporting networks of CSOs in the region also poses certain challenges
as many organizations may be new to USAID funding, but USAID is
employing careful approaches to ensure consultation and co-creation
processes before and during activity implementation processes.
Question. Please describe all programs within the U.S. Strategy on
Countering Corruption that USAID is using specifically to counter the
acts of significant corruption in Mexico?
Answer. USAID programs in Mexico focused on addressing corruption
include:
Through the Promoting Transparency and Integrity
(ProIntegridad) activity, USAID focuses on reducing corruption
and increasing transparency in the business and investment
environment by improving governance and business practices and
enhancing coalitions that drive integrity. It uses an open-
business approach to strengthen the Government of Mexico,
private sector, and civil society's capacity and commitment to
promote a fair, transparent, and competitive business
environment that attracts greater investment and drives
economic growth. This activity works in the states of
Chihuahua, Guanajuato, Jalisco, Nuevo Leon, and Sonora to
promote regulatory reform and the adoption of integrity
standards consistent with international business integrity
standards and the USMCA.
Through the ProBusiness: Regulatory Improvement to Promote
Local Investment activity, USAID works with the Centro de
Estudios Economicos del Sector Privado (CEESP) to improve
business transparency and integrity practices, reduce
opportunities for corruption in target municipalities, and
promote local economic development by streamlining local
regulations and strengthening private sector regulatory
compliance and advocacy for better policies.
Through the Enhancing Citizen Engagement in Reducing
Corruption in Quintana Roo, USAID works with the Mexican civil
society organization Ciudadan@s por la Transparencia to reduce
corruption in the state of Quintana Roo by strengthening the
capacity of the local anti-corruption system and municipal
governments to promote the implementation of local anti-
corruption policies. The activity also supports the
participation of and constructive advocacy by citizens, private
sector, and media for increased local-level transparency and
accountability measures.
The Mexico-U.S. Border Reporting Hub supports journalists'
ability to produce responsible, well-sourced, and original
investigative reporting that exposes corruption and promotes
transparency and accountability in targeted northern border
states and municipalities. The activity also helps journalists
use necessary digital and physical security protocols to
perform their work safely.
Question. Please list the countries and organizations from the
Western Hemisphere from which USAID has received applications for the
Reporters Shield program, and the list of organizations selected from
the Western Hemisphere.
Answer. Reporters Shield has received 22 applications from the
Western Hemisphere, and below is the breakdown by country, including
the number of applicants/entities selected. Due to security reasons and
in order to protect applicants and members from potentially being
targeted with additional (or any) SLAPPsuits, we do not have a list of
organizations and outlets that apply or that are members.
Of the applicants, two from the United States have become members
(applications opened last May and were processed in late Fall after
rigorous due diligence checks), with seven still in active discussions/
review for membership. Please note that USAID's funding for Reporters
Shield only goes to countries in which USAID works. A private donor is
providing support for non-USAID countries, including the United States.
Below is the list of number of applicants from the Western Hemisphere
(and the number selected and became members):
Antigua and Barbuda--1
Brazil--1
British Virgin Islands--1
Colombia--2
El Salvador--1
Honduras--1
Jamaica--1
Mexico--1
Panama--2
Paraguay--1
Peru--2
USA--7 (two are members of Reporters Shield)
Venezuela--1
