NOMINATION OF BROOKE ROLLINS TO BE SECRETARY OF AGRICULTURE ---------- THURSDAY, JANUARY 23, 2025 U.S. Senate Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry Washington, DC. The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m., in room SD-106, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. John Boozman, Chairman of the Committee, presiding. Present: Senators Boozman , McConnell, Hoeven, Ernst, Hyde-Smith, Marshall, Tuberville, Justice, Grassley, Thune, Fischer, Moran, Klobuchar, Bennet, Smith, Durbin, Booker, Lujan, Warnock, Welch, Schiff, and Slotkin. STATEMENT OF HON. BOOZMAN, U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF ARKANSAS, CHAIRMAN, U.S. COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, NUTRITION, AND FORESTRY Chairman Boozman. Good morning. I am delighted to call today's hearing U.S. Senate Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry to order. First, I would like to congratulate two Members of this Committee who were instrumental in organizing the inaugural ceremonies that took place at the Capitol earlier this week, Senator Klobuchar and Senator Fischer, respectively the Chairwoman and Ranking Member of the Senate Rules Committee in the last Congress. For more than a year, the Joint Congressional Committee on Inaugural Ceremonies, led by Senator Klobuchar, put tremendous effort into the planning, organizing a traditional ceremony on the west front of the Capitol. As you know, those plans had to be set aside at the very last minute because of the bitter cold, for the more intimate gathering inside the Rotunda, that we witnessed on Monday. Thanks to her efforts, and without missing a beat, our Nation's tradition of peacefully transferring power continued, and the President was sworn in on the 20th of January, as required by the Constitution. Many thanks to Senator Klobuchar, Senator Fischer, and the staff for successfully organizing and hosting one of our Nation's most important civic traditions. I would also like to congratulate Senator Klobuchar on becoming the Ranking Member of our Committee. I have worked closely with her over the years and look forward to continuing our partnership. I visited Minnesota with Senator Klobuchar in the spring of 2023, and met with farmers with the Gopher State, and similarly, cold weather, that we are experiencing today, only it was in May. I greatly enjoyed the opportunity to hear those farm families, and I look forward to hosting her in Arkansas in the not too distant future. I would like to welcome the Committee's Members. For those returning, thank you for your continuing service. For our four new Members--Senators, Slotkin, Schiff, Moran, and Justice-- thank you for choosing to serve on the Committee. I look forward to working with you and learning more about what is important to you and your states. Our Committee, established in 1825, is one of the oldest in the Senate. Our hearing room, which we will use in the future, is unique in that we do not have a dais but a table. We sit across from each other, not away from each other, symbolic and practical. I look forward to convening many meetings in Russell 328 in the coming years, for us to work together and address the concerns of our farmers and ranchers and rural communities and those needing assistance. As the Chairman, my door is open to every Member of this Committee. The fundamental purpose of our Committee is to solve problems and help our citizens. I welcome you to share your ideas, concerns, and your solutions. Agriculture is not partisan. We all care about our Nation's farmers and ranchers. The state of rural America concerns us all. We all believe that no American should be hungry. I intend for this Committee to be highly productive in the 119th Congress. Working together this year, we will pass a farm bill that will meet the needs of our farmers, for today and for the future. This morning we meet to consider the nomination of Brooke Leslie Rollins of Texas to be the Secretary of Agriculture. Ms. Rollins, congratulations to you on your nomination. You are being nominated at a very challenging time for America's farmers. The costs for fuel, seed, and fertilizer remain high. Interest rates are also very high, and continue to be high. Farm gate prices are low. Farmers everywhere are losing money on every acre they cultivate while farmers in certain parts of the country are losing hundreds of dollars per acre. Thankfully, Congress responded at the end of last year and provided a bridge to help ensure producers could plant again this year. Delivering this economic assistance to our farmers will be one of the major tasks you will be faced as Secretary, but as I mentioned, this was only a bridge. It was necessary because the safety net our producers have counted on in the past no longer works. I look forward to working with my colleagues in this room, across the Senate, and with you to help create a farm bill that meets the realities of modern-day agriculture. Beyond the economic strains our farmers and ranchers feel, I believe our producers want an improved relationship with USDA. They want to know USDA has their back and is helping them with the tools and support needed to successfully and profitably farm and ranch, rather than coercing them into production practices that do not work for their operations. They want new markets and new opportunities to sell what they produce. They want conservation programs to help with the issues they are facing on their farms. They want rural communities to have the infrastructure and the resources for a high quality of life. USDA, with the right leadership, can do all of these things. Beyond agriculture production, USDA is a land manager, research institution, food regulator, protector of animal health, and rural lender. There is very little USDA does not touch or have an impact on. All of these resources and abilities can be used to improve the quality of life not only in rural America but all of America. As I met and talked with Ms. Rollins, it is clear the needs of American farmers, ranchers, and rural communities will be her focus. It is also clear that she has the relationships across the new Administration and an understanding of the processes in which decisions are made in the executive branch to best position our producers for success. I look forward to seeing her bring her considerable skills and her abilities to bear at USDA for the benefit of our farmers, ranchers, and rural communities. I now recognize Ranking Member Klobuchar for her opening statement. STATEMENT OF HON. KLOBUCHAR, U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF MINNESOTTA Senator Klobuchar. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and we welcome you, Ms. Rollins, thank you, your entire family, that seems to take up like ten rows, as well as the FFA, your FFA officers--it is kind of an incredible group there--and your ag teacher. I want to thank Chairman Boozman for holding this important nomination hearing. Thank you to our colleagues from Texas who are here. Senator Boozman and I have been friends and colleagues for years, and as you noted, you came to visit my state. We did not consider that cold that day in May. We considered it a beach day with a touch of snow. I want to thank you for visiting with our farmers and our ranchers and our conservation and nutrition leaders in our state. I also look forward to working with you to be a voice for rural America. All of our colleagues on this Committee are incredible voices for rural America. I am really excited. I have told our Democratic leaders on this Committee how excited I am about the people that are on this Committee, and I believe we are going to work really well together. I want to mention our friend and colleague, Senator Stabenow, for her 14 years of leadership of this Committee. She is now retired from this Committee. Whether it was passing farm bills, standing up for conservation programs, or making sure there was food on the table, she was always at the forefront of the fight. I would like to thank all of our returning Members as well as the new Senators on the Committee, that Senator Boozman mentioned--Senator Schiff and Senator Slotkin. They have been already really strong participants in all of these discussions we have been having. Senator Moran as well as Senator Justice, thank you. We are looking forward to continuing the strong tradition of bipartisanship. Ms. Rollins, again thank you for being here. I enjoyed our previous discussions, and I look forward to the hearing today and hearing from you about your plans for the future. I know you and your family--I just talked to your mom about it--have had a farm in Minnesota for years, and I hope you will be visiting our state again soon. As you know, the Secretary of Agriculture is a voice for rural America within the President's Cabinet. If rural America is going to prosper it will be important to have a Secretary who will address the challenges facing farmers and rural families, who sees the importance of nutrition and conservation, and who will work with us on a strong bipartisan farm bill. We, on this Committee, have made progress on so many fronts, from strengthening crop insurance to improving voluntary conservation programs to the good work we have done on biofuels across the aisle. There are still numerous challenges facing America--avian flu, struggling dairy producers, flooding, droughts, wildfire, as Senator Schiff well knows, scarcity at food shelves, and the lack of housing, childcare, and health care facilities in rural America. As we discussed, I have concerns about some of the proposed policies from the Administration, and while I have always supported targeted tariffs, I am concerned that major across- the-board tariff increases could hurt rural America. I hope that, if confirmed, that Ms. Rollins will make the case for sensible trade policy that will work for our farmers and rural America. We also need leaders of the USDA that believe in science and research, which is so critical right now. I know many of our Members will be asking on that front. As the Ranking Member of this Committee, I am committed to doing what is right for rural America, which means finding common ground when we can, but standing our ground where we must. In Minnesota, our prosperity depends on the strength and vitality of our rural communities. Farmers and livestock producers need access to safety net programs with weather conditions threatening all the time, input costs, and the like. Rural businesses cannot spur innovation and create jobs without an available workforce, which I think is going to be an issue we will be confronting this year, as well as childcare, health care, housing, and broadband. I know this is true not just for me but for all Members of this Committee. I look forward to the hearing today and learning more about, Ms. Rollins, your plans for the Department of Agriculture. Thank you very much, and thank you to our colleagues. Chairman Boozman. Today we are being joined by our colleagues from Texas to introduce our nominee. Thank you all for being here. Senator Cornyn, will you please proceed. Senator Cornyn. Thank you, Chairman Boozman and Ranking Member Klobuchar, Members of the Agriculture Committee. I am delighted to be here, along with my colleague, Senator Cruz, to introduce our friend, Brooke Rollins, to be the next Secretary of the U.S. Department of Agriculture. This one is a no-brainer. Everybody who knows Brooke Rollins loves Brooke Rollins, and you will too, once you get to know her. I first met Brooke years ago, when serving in State Government in Texas, but it was when she was the Policy Director for then-Governor Rick Perry that I began to see what a truly dedicated public servant she was, and still is. Since this time, as you know, from reading her resume, you know she has had quite an impressive career, and so I am delighted to be here today to help introduce her. She was born and raised, as was pointed out, in Glen Rose, Texas. For those of you who have not pulled out your map to see where that is, it is about an hour southwest of Fort Worth. She brings firsthand experience to the often difficult realities of farm life into the Department of Agriculture. She graduated from Texas A&M School of Agricultural Leadership, Education, and Communications. I thought I heard a whoop somewhere.  Senator Cornyn. Texas is home to nearly 230,000 farms and ranches, more than any other state in the country, and one in every seven Texans works in an agriculture-related job. This is critical to our state and to the Nation, as has been pointed out. Brooke's agricultural roots will serve her well as Secretary of Agriculture, to give farmers and producers from the Lone Star State and across the country a clarion voice when it comes to President Trump's Cabinet. Ms. Rollins' credentials go way beyond the day-to-day intricacies of farming. She is also a University of Texas Law School graduate, and a policy wonk. She will confess to that during this hearing today. That is demonstrated by her years of service as general counsel to Governor Perry and her 15 years leading one of Texas' premier policy institutes, the Texas Public Policy Foundation. It was during President Trump's first administration she served as Director of the Domestic Policy Council. Many of us worked with her closely there, where she assisted Jared Kushner in that job. You know that position is responsible for coordinating the domestic policymaking of the White House and ensuring that decisions and programs are consistent with the President's goals, and overseeing the implementation of the President's domestic policy agenda. Since her time in the first Trump administration, Brooke has served as President and CEO of America First Public Policy Institute, where she helped craft the agenda for President Trump's second term. I have worked with Brooke in a number of roles and seen her as she has helped advance bipartisan legislation, both in Austin and here in the Nation's capital, and I know she will bring that experience and that temperament to her job at USDA. It is a good thing because she has her job cut out for her. First, Congress has failed to pass a 5-year farm bill, and I know that is priority number one for this Committee. She will have an opportunity to work with each of you to shape this critical legislation that farmers and ranchers across the country depend on. As has been alluded, I think by Senator Klobuchar, the disasters that we have experienced throughout the country have hit farm country particularly hard, and I know she will work hard with you and all of us to make sure we provide an essential lifeline to our farmers and ranchers. As Coach Tuberville knows, the Texas A&M football team, of which Brooke is a devoted fan, says their student body is the 12th man, who propels them to victory. I know Brooke is honored to step up now and become the 12th woman for the farmers and ranchers of America. I am looking forward to working with her and with all of you to pass a farm bill and put farmers back where they deserve to be, and that is first and foremost in our policy deliberations. I have no doubt that Brooke is exactly the person for the job to implement President Trump's agenda at USDA. It is my honor to be here with all of you, and her family, and a multitude of friends. Even her high school ag teacher is here. Everybody who knows Brooke, loves Brooke, and I know you will too as you get to know her. Thank you for allowing me to be here and say a few words by way of introduction. Chairman Boozman. Thank you, Senator Cornyn. Senator Cruz. Senator Cruz. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Boozman. Thank you Ranking Member Klobuchar, Members of the Committee. Let me start by saying what Senator Cornyn said a minute ago is absolutely right. This is a no-brainer. Brooke Rollins is the nominee to be Secretary of Agriculture is an extraordinary choice, and I have absolute confidence that every Member of this Committee is going to be very, very happy working with her in that role in the next four years. I have been friends with Brooke for over two decades, from when she was Policy Director for then-Governor Rick Perry to when she led the Texas Public Policy Foundation, which became the preeminent free market state foundation in the country, to when she came to Washington to join President Trump to lead the Domestic Policy Council, to her more recent years leading the America First Policy Institute. At every stage, she has proven herself to be a leader, she has proven herself to be an innovative policy thinker, and she has proven herself able to bring people together to accomplish major objectives. All of those skills will serve her and the farmers and ranchers of America exceptionally well. To know Brooke is to know she is an Aggie, and all Aggies are members of a cult----  Senator Cruz . which I say from a place of deep love. I am convinced if you were to cut Brooke's hand right here it would not bleed red, but it would bleed maroon onto this table. She brings that ferocity to everything she does. She brings creativity. She brings joy. Brooke is always smiling, and she is smiling because she has a vision of where to take us. She grew up in a small agricultural community, Glen Rose, Texas. Her summers were spent at her family's Minnesota farm, helping with the corn, potato, and soybean crops. I have to say, Brooke, the level of foresight to kiss up to the Ranking Member as a young child is impressive.  Senator Cruz. Her experiences in barrel racing--and by the way, for everyone who knows barrel racers, yes, they are crazy--and raising livestock for 4-H and Future Farmers of America, instilled in her a profound appreciation for the challenges and rewards of life in agriculture. Farmers and ranchers in America right now are facing extraordinary challenges, challenges that are putting their livelihood at risk, putting their families at risk, putting the ability to provide food and fiber and clothing for the American people at genuine risk. Farmers and ranchers of this Nation, the farmers and ranchers in the great State of Texas, are looking to this Committee for leadership, and they are looking to the next Secretary of Agriculture for leadership. In Texas, in South Texas, we face historic droughts, and yet our neighbor, the Nation of Mexico, is in brazen violation of the 1944 Water Treaty that obligates it to provide water each year to the people of South Texas. I have no doubt that soon-to-be Secretary Rollins will be a ferocious advocate for those South Texas farmers, just as she is a ferocious advocate for farmers and ranchers in every one of your states and all across the country. She is going to be an extraordinary and even an historic Secretary of Agriculture. I am proud to join John Cornyn in supporting my friend, Brooke Rollins, and I encourage you to do the same. Chairman Boozman. Thank you, Senator Cruz. Again, thank you, Senator Cornyn, for being here. I would now like to recognize our nominee, Brooke Rollins, to introduce some of her guests, before I administer the oath and she gives her opening statement. Ms. Rollins. Good morning, everyone. What a joy to be here, and wow, a little surreal and slightly overwhelming, the two gentlemen that were sitting up here, whom I have known, as they mentioned, for a long time. I want to thank them. A few guests, and I appreciate, Senator Boozman, the opportunity to introduce them. My awesome mom right here, whose new issue that all of you know, the oldest freshman legislator in Texas history, Helen Kerwin, raised my sisters and me by herself in that small town, and PFAS is her big issue. I know a lot of you are certainly concerned with that. My incredible husband, Mark Rollins. We met the first week of our freshman year at Texas A&M, Senator Tuberville, in 1990, 35 years ago, and our four incredible children, Luke, Jake, Anna, and Lily are here with me. Luke is the oldest--Luke, raise your hand. Listen to your mother. Very good. He is a sophomore at Texas A&M University in the Corps of Cadets, and in fact, left College Station at 1:30 last night, 1:30 a.m., to drive all night, catch a flight in Dallas, and be here this morning. I am especially grateful to him and my other incredible children. Even though they are all teenagers--Luke is 20--it has been the joy and most important part of my life, being their mom, so what a joy to have them. My sister, Ann Bluntzer, my sister, Helen Hubert, Eliza, my niece, they are all here, my sister-in-law and brother-in-law, Tim and Elizabeth Yaggi. My incredible ag teacher, who I would like to stand up. This is Mr. Gary Rosenbush, who put up with a lot from this FFA'er.  Ms. Rollins. I have often said that the Future Farmers of America changed my life and put me on a course that, frankly, leads me to today. Mr. Rosenbush was a big part of that. I also want to recognize, a lot of people know that I take great pride in my short but I think very successful life as a Little League softball coach. My daughter, Lily, was the catcher on the team, but most of the rest of the team also flew in last night. The Hot Tamales, everyone, from Texas, are here. Thank you guys for being here.  Ms. Rollins. My 1990-1991 State FFA officer team from all parts of Texas. There were 10 of us. The other 9 all came--ag teachers, insurance agents, workers of the land, they are all here. What a joy to have my State FFA officer team here, as well. If you all want to stand. What an incredible inspiration.  Ms. Rollins. I know, Senator, I could go on and on. I promise I am going to cut this short. One other thing, one other person, Pastor Jentezen Franklin of Georgia, who has been such an inspiration to me, flew all the way in from Free Chapel in Georgia to pray with my family and I this morning. Pastor Franklin, I want to thank you, as well. One of the great pastors of our time. Pastor, thank you. I have so many Texas friends, other family that are here, but I will wrap it there and just say what an incredible honor to have all of them behind me today. Chairman Boozman. That is great. That is wonderful. Please stand and raise your right hand. Do you swear or affirm that the statement that you are about to provide is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you God? Ms. Rollins. I do. Chairman Boozman. Do you agree that if confirmed you will respond to requests to appear and testify before any duly constituted committee of the Senate? Ms. Rollins. I do. Chairman Boozman. Again, congratulations on your nomination. You can have a seat. You are recognized for five minutes to give your opening statement. STATEMENT OF BROOKE ROLLINS, OF TEXAS, TO BE SECRETARY OF AGRICULTURE Ms. Rollins. Thank you. Chairman Boozman, Ranking Member Klobuchar, and distinguished Members of this Committee, first my thanks to President Donald Trump for his faith in me to lead the United States Department of Agriculture. His confidence fuels my determination to deliver. I also want to thank my dear friends and fellow Texans, Senator John Cornyn and Senator Ted Cruz for so graciously introducing me to this Committee. I also, obviously, want to extend my sincere thanks to all of you, the U.S. Senate Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry, for your careful consideration of my nomination, and understand, and perhaps most importantly, I want to thank and am so overwhelmed at the honor to potentially serve the men and women who daily, without pause or complaint, provide our great nation and the world with the best food, fiber, and fuel. Throughout the past several weeks I have met or spoken with every Republican and Democrat Senator on this Committee, and I appreciate your insights, your concerns, and your very wise counsel. It is clear we all agree that farmers and ranchers are the cornerstone of our Nation's communities, and I commit to you today that if confirmed I will do everything in my ability to make sure our farmers, ranchers, and rural communities thrive. I also want to thank the many Senators and Representatives on Capitol Hill with whom I have had the incredible opportunity to work with these last two decades, during my career in public policy, in my time first with Governor Rick Perry, then leading the Texas Public Policy Foundation, in my various roles in the Trump administration, the first one, and since 2021, in my role founding and leading the America First Policy Institute. Each of you cares deeply about the American people whom we all serve, and I promise my work will reflect that commitment. Growing up in the small ag town of Glen Rose, Texas--you all have heard this--population then 1,200 people, is where my story begins. Then my world revolved around the Future Farmers of America, 4-H, and the endless cycle of baling hay, livestock shows, and rodeos. That still, today, constitute the calendar of our small corner of Texas. That experience sent me to Texas A&M on an agriculture scholarship, where I studied and majored in ag leadership and development, then on to the University of Texas Law School, where I graduated with honors and performed a federal judicial clerkship. Then, of course, to helm the policy shop of Texas Governor Rick Perry. It was there that I had my first direct leadership role in big state ag policy. I had been in office serving Governor Rick Perry for 2-plus years when I received a call, a small think tank of two or three staffers in San Antonio, who asked if I would be interested in being their new leader, and I answered that call, as well, thinking that as my husband and I built our family that that would be helpful and a good potential opportunity to be a great mom but also continue to fight for Texas. At TPPF over the next years we fundamentally redefined the mission of a think tank from just having ideas or writing about them in white papers to actually effectually changing policy for the people of our state. We engaged strongly during those 15 years the Texas rural and small town communities, giving them a voice in government that was too often denied. In short, we changed the game in Texas. Changing the game is exactly why I accepted the invitation to join President Trump's first administration at the beginning of 2018. Everything that we had sought to do in Texas those last decades, to make policy for real change, for real Texans, was being done in the first Trump administration, and I was so honored and excited to be part of it. I joined first to the White House Office of American Innovation as its leader. I then soon became the Assistant to the President, in addition, on Strategic Initiatives, and eventually added the role of the Director of the Domestic Policy Council. In January 2021, exactly four years ago, we understood that President Trump's second-term agenda would be delayed, so I had the privilege and the idea of establishing yet another institution of policy leadership, and the America First Policy Institute was born. I currently serve as the President and CEO there. Thanks to President Trump and to all of you, I hope to have the opportunity to bring that level of passion and commitment to the USDA. I need not tell you, of all people, that this is surpassingly important, because agriculture is surpassingly important to us as a Nation. All Americans are important, but the farmer, the worker of the land, who feeds all the others, is amongst the most notable. Thomas Jefferson wrote that ``Agriculture is our wisest pursuit because it will--excuse me, I do not want to get Thomas Jefferson's quote wrong; cannot misquote Thomas Jefferson--because it will, in the end, contribute most to real wealth, good morals, and happiness'', and his wisdom holds true today. I fully recognize that if I am confirmed I am stepping into the role during one of the most economically challenging times in American agriculture history. With that in mind, I want to share with you, as I close, my top priorities for day one, and then perhaps a longer-term priority. First, we must ensure that the disaster and economic assistance authorized by Congress is deployed as quickly and as efficiently as possible. Second, we must work with the great men and women of USDA, the stakeholder communities, and state leaders--my deep background in state policy--to immediately and comprehensively get a handle on the state of animal disease outbreaks. Third, we must immediately begin to modernize, realign, rethink the United States Department of Agriculture, responding to the clear needs and the desires of the American people, as set forth so well by the President of the United States over this last historic week. Finally, and longer term, we understand that serving all American agriculture and all the American people means ensuring that our rural communities are equipped and supported to prosper not just today but tomorrow and the day after that and the many tomorrows to come. This includes exploring improvements to our rural development programs, demanding strong and steady domestic and export markets for our beautiful agriculture bounty, eliminating burdensome and costly regulations that hamper innovation, ensuring our nutrition programs are effective and efficient, and putting in the work to make sure we have a healthy and prepared next generation of farmers, ranchers, entrepreneurs, innovators, and indeed, all Americans. This is what we need for the next century of American greatness. These are just four of my top priorities. Beyond these, I am dedicated and committed to providing all of you with the timely technical assistance that we will need to ensure that we have a farm bill that moves forward. My aim, after all, is the same as yours, the same that brought you to the Senate, the same that brought Donald J. Trump to the presidency again, and that is to serve the people and this great country. Thank you, Senator, and thank you, Ranking Member Klobuchar.  Chairman Boozman. Thank you for your opening statement. As is customary, my colleagues and I would like to ask you some questions. Each Senator will have 7 minutes to ask questions during this first round. If we need an additional round that will be 5 minutes. Before I ask my questions I would like to add a number of letters in support of Ms. Rollins' nomination into the record. In particular, I would like to highlight one letter signed by the Farm Bureau, the Farmers Union, the National Council of Farmers Cooperatives, and more than 400 other agricultural organizations supporting Ms. Rollins' nomination. Without objection, so ordered.  Chairman Boozman. In your written statement, again, you alluded to, and the testimony that you just provided, you talked about your focus, you know, some of the things you want to do. Can you expand on that a little bit more? The first 100 days, what can we expect? Ms. Rollins. I think the first 100 days, sir, if I am so fortunate to be confirmed, will be a fast and furious effort to ensure that we move that economic aid out. In fact, when I got the call from the President about this particular position it was the honor of a lifetime to accept that call and to accept the nomination. Then about 5 minutes later I started thinking about, okay, what do I do to make this successful and perhaps the best, most effective, efficient, United States Department of Agriculture in history, since President Lincoln first launched this Department. The aid to the farmers, top priority, animal disease, top priority, ensuring that we begin to move toward President Trump's vision. I work for him. I am his Cabinet Member. Also working alongside all of you. In so many of the conversations that we all had over the last 4 to 6 weeks, from both sides of the aisle, from both Republicans and Democrats, were very encouraging to me. I believe that there is an opportunity, while there will be moments of disagreement. I have no doubt that there will also be many, many moments of agreement. Chairman Boozman, my thought is that we get in there, and anyone that knows me and that has worked with me over the course of all these years knows that excellence is not only the goal but the expectation, that we move with rapid speed to ensure it gets done, that we work 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, for our constituents, which is American agriculture, and that at the end of the day this country and that community is thriving in a way perhaps they never have before, because of the work and the foresight and the goals and the vision that I think is so important. Chairman Boozman. Good. I appreciate you, you know, on several occasions, bringing up the disaster assistance. This Committee worked in a very bipartisan way to get that done. It was a big effort, and it took a lot of work, and again, we were able to get that done in a very bipartisan way. That is what we have heard about from our farmers now, is thank you for doing it but we desperately need it so that we can talk to our bankers and try and figure things out from this last year, where most farmers lost a lot of money, their path forward. Again, that, I think, is music to all of our ears. Trade is vitally important to American agriculture. Our abundant yields and high-quality crops help feed the world. Can you please describe how the President's trade agenda will prioritize the needs of American farmers and ranchers. If our trading partners unfairly target U.S. agriculture producers, how will the Administration minimize the impact to our producers? Ms. Rollins. Thank you, Senator, and I am actually glad this is at the top of the next few hours, because I think it is on the mind of every Member of this Committee and perhaps every member of the ag community across this great nation. The first, I think, that is important to note is that the last few years we have almost a $45 billion trade deficit for our ag products. A key priority will be expanding access to these markets across the country. We have already been sort of vision-boarding--not to get ahead of the process, but I want to make sure I am able to hit the ground running--how it is we begin to immediately effectuate bringing down that $45 billion trade deficit, and it is just up 42 percent in the last year. There is a deep recognition that corn prices are down 35 percent just in the last year, as well--the past two years, I am sorry--and that, in fact, our farmers are hurting. Regarding the President's tariff agenda, I think it probably comes as no surprise to anyone sitting in this room that he believes it is a very important tool in his toolkit to continue or bring America back to the forefront of the world and to ensure that we have a thriving economy. Just as he did, and we did, in the first administration, he also understands the potential devastating impact to our farmers and our ranchers. During that time I have spoken with Secretary Perdue a few times on how that was managed, and to that team, so I fully understand, and that we are prepared to execute something similar, if approved, if confirmed, but also working with the White House to ensure that we can close those holes for our farmers and ranchers, moving forward, under any sort of tariff execution in the next coming days, in the next few years. That will be a top priority of mine. Chairman Boozman. Very good. Hunger is an issue that we continue to face. My home State of Arkansas has the highest rate of food insecurity in the Nation. At USDA you will be responsible for leading 16 nutrition programs that assist 1 in 4 Americans. These programs make up the vast majority of the spending at the Department. In spite of these programs, which have grown substantially over the last 20 years, the national food insecurity rate has hovered around 12 percent since 2001, even during times of economic prosperity. The goal of these programs is to provide temporary assistance to those in need, but the focus on moving families to a place of economic independence has been lost. Will you commit to reviewing these programs to ensure they help incentivize Americans to secure steady employment while still being able to trust that their federal supplemental assistance can be relied on in times of need? Ms. Rollins. Senator, I so appreciate your concern and focus on this incredibly important program. I think sometimes people on our side of the aisle are framed as those that do not care as much about the kids or those who are hurting or those from disadvantaged communities. I know I have spent my career working to ensure that every corner of America, that everyone has a shot at the American dream, first with Rick Perry, then with my think tank, then with President Trump, then with the AFPI, the America First Policy Institute. I too have a real heart for this work, and I have talked to many of you about that in your offices. That is perhaps driven by being raised in a small town, by a single mom, and we did not have much. Now, we never participated in the nutrition program, but I am fully aware and have a heart for this work and for this community, that it is easy to make the commitment to ensure that we are doing everything we can, that this supplemental program continues on a course of being effective and efficient. Having said that, it is also imperative to us that every taxpayer dollar that is spent in support of these programs we fully understand that it is reaching its intended recipient, that that recipient is able to use it effectively and efficiently, for true nutrition reason, that we have a real health issue in this country. You all know this. I think 4 out of 5 children are facing obesity or close to it, that level of diabetes and chronic diseases continue to rise. We, together, and myself, if so fortunate to be confirmed, will have a major role in all of the above, ensuring that these programs are serving those who need them, and doing it effectively, but also ensuring that the taxpayers are being well served, that the dollar that we take from, you know, my electrician in Fort Worth, who has his own small business, and then sending it to a family in need, that that dollar is being used in the best and most effective way. That is certainly my commitment to you, Chairman. Chairman Boozman. Thank you. Senator Klobuchar. Senator Klobuchar. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Again, welcome, Ms. Rollins. As we both noted, the Chairman and I, this Committee has worked together, and all the Members know this, on a bipartisan way to pass farm bills in the past, improve the farm safety net, stand up for conservation, nutrition, food security. Will you be a force for working with both sides of the aisle? Ms. Rollins. Thank you so much, Senator Klobuchar, for that question, and it is exceedingly important to me that we deliver for American farmers and ranchers, exceedingly. I have already begun to lose some sleep over how to make that happen in a way that is productive and supporting your work. I have a long history of working in a bipartisan manner. It may not be at the forefront of my bio or my resume, but I worked with many of you in the last administration on the First Step Act, which I believe was perhaps the hallmark of President Trump 1.0 and bipartisan work together. I sat in an office for many hours with Senator Durbin, Senator Grassley, Senator Booker, Senator Scott, and many others from both sides, as we hammered out how to solve the criminal justice challenges that our Bureau of Prisons is facing. I hope to bring that same skill set and perhaps knowledge base in relationships to this effort, as well. Senator Klobuchar. Thank you. I appreciate you mentioned animal disease as one of your lead priorities, as well as the disaster economic assistance. As you know, and you and I discussed this, since 2022, the most recent outbreak of avian flu has devastated poultry producers, spread to dairy cattle, resulting in at least one death. We are starting to see increases in certain prices attributed to that. If confirmed, how will you ensure that farmers have the resources they need to combat the spread of this virus? What is your plan? Ms. Rollins. There is no doubt that what the community, and whom we all work for, that community, not just America but the entire world relies on for an abundant, safe, and secure food supply. Just learning of the devastation in Georgia, just over the last few weeks, with the poultry outbreak and the depopulation there of our poultry, of course, to your point about dairy, it has been affecting some of the dairy herds, I believe, across 16 states. There is a lot that I have to learn on this, and if confirmed, this will be, as I mentioned in my opening statement, one of the very top priorities. We are hyper-focused on finding the team right now--I am assured they are already working. I have obviously respected the process and not gotten too involved--but I know that the current team and the future team will be working hand-in-hand to do everything we can on animal disease. Senator, if I may add one more thing. My deep background working in state policy included working very closely with Governors' offices and ag commissioners across this great country. In fact, in the last White House I sort of took it upon myself, which is where I met a few of our Governors, who are now here, to work closely and in concert and aligned with both Republican and Democrat leaders from the states. Senator Klobuchar. Thank you. I really appreciate that. We have 7 minutes, so I am going to go a little quicker here. Ms. Rollins. Yes, ma'am. Senator Klobuchar. I will note that just yesterday the Administration announced they will halt external public health communications from the CDC on these avian flu, animal diseases, and these important announcements have helped keep producers up-to-date with the latest information on disease spread, health of workers. While I know that was not under the USDA, I just urge you to talk to them about that. We are concerned. Biofuels--and I appreciated our discussion on that--while you served as the CEO of the Texas Public Policy Foundation, your organization was often critical on biofuels, including ethanol. As you know, we have worked really hard to make this so we do not just have one fuel, that we have options here, including with Senator Ernst and Senator Fischer and Senator Grassley, Senator Thune, many others. What role do you believe biofuels play in our domestic energy production? How will you continue to promote the production of these fuels as Secretary? Ms. Rollins. Thank you, and I appreciate you bringing that up. It is my understanding that those reports were written over a decade ago. I have not seen anything more recent. Texas Public Policy Foundation puts out almost 900 to 1,000 pieces of content a year. I did not author that specific piece. To be clear, there is no doubt, coming from Texas, I was a massive defender of fossil fuels and the importance of fossil fuels in the energy independence and energy dominance narrative. Clearly I have spoken with so many of you on both sides of the aisle on this issue. I will be a Secretary for all agriculture. It is really important to me that we continue to defend and elevate and honor all sources of fuel. My former boss and current boss, in his current Energy Dominance Plan, included biofuels as an important piece of his agenda. I really look forward to continuing that. Senator Klobuchar. I know your family, based on the forms-- I appreciate you getting us those forms--that your family has significant financial interests in the oil industry. Will these interests motivate decisions you make at the Department, especially when they impact your family's financial holdings? Ms. Rollins. Senator, I can promise you this, and you and I have met a few times through the years, and have more in-depth discussions, but not as many as I would like. Hopefully a lot more in the future. I can promise you this. Anyone that has ever worked with me will tell you, even to the detriment of organizations I have run, detriment financially, to my potential family, that I have never, not ever, made a decision based on financial interest, ever. That certainly will not begin now. Senator Klobuchar. Thank you. You discussed briefly with Senator Boozman the export markets. I also appreciated you mentioned that in your long-term focus on exports. As you know, during the first Trump administration we heard resounding calls from farmers that they want trade, not aid--those were exact words, I am remembering. They want to grow their market and not just get government payment. We worked hard on this Committee to help farmers build markets here and abroad. Senator Hoeven and I have set up a Rural Export Center, in fact. Ms. Rollins, how would you work with President Trump, the Office of the U.S. Trade Rep, and others within the Administration to ensure that they understand the effects of potential retaliatory tariffs on American farmers, and how will you help them manage this risk, beyond just getting extra payments to make up for it. Will you be a voice to make sure people understand the importance of exports for rural America? It is not just farming. It is also manufacturing and the like. Ms. Rollins. No, that is correct. The, I believe, extraordinary value that I potentially bring to this table is having served in the last White House for three years, right alongside President Trump. I believe I may be the most well- versed in how the interagency process works, of all the Cabinet, of how the interagency process works, of how the discussions are handled, of what the Oval Office meetings look like, and how to ensure that at every corner that my team, that our community, that what we all represent together, is at the table, fighting for what we believe is necessary for these communities. Senator Klobuchar. Okay. Thank you. I have some important questions for the second round here on conservation and nutrition, and I know my colleagues will be asking them, as well. Thank you. Ms. Rollins. Thank you. Chairman Boozman. Senator McConnell. Senator McConnell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Congratulations on your nomination, and I appreciate you coming by the office. I had a chance to tell you then that Kentucky agriculture is a little different. We have 75,000 farms, but most of them are small. We are also the number one beef cattle state east of the Mississippi. People do not generally associate Kentucky with that. I want to echo what others here have said about trade. I went over to the trade representative on the floor of the House--we were there for the big speech--and introduced myself, and I said, ``Do you have anything to do?'' She basically did not have an answer. It seems to me that trade has sort of become a word, for a lot of Americans, that implies exportation of jobs. In Kentucky, we think of trade as exportation of products. It is an extremely important part of what we do. I think both of the candidates in the last election sort of shied away from this issue. As others have said, give us some hope that maybe we could get back in the trade business. We would need trade promotion authority, which we currently do not have. I would be interested in your thoughts further about this. Ms. Rollins. Yes, thank you, Senator McConnell, and it was an honor to be in your office to talk a little bit about Kentucky bourbon and a few other important things. It is the first time I have ever heard, I think, anyone say that President Trump has shied away from anything. I do not specifically have a recall of anything specific about him not talking about trade, other than perhaps to your point that our country, and especially our ag community, is in a tough spot right now with regards to exports and moving our products out. I know that the USMCA is back up for negotiation, along with other trade agreements. Here is what I am very encouraged about, Senator, and I hope it perhaps gives you some encouragement, as well. In my now almost nine years, maybe eight years, with President Trump, at the end of the day we all know him to be the consummate deal maker. I believe that that skill and that intense focus on making deals, for his people, not only for America but for the ag community that supported him at 90 percent, since really the very, very beginning, I think 338 counties out of 344 agriculture counties voted for him. He knows that these are the people that had been with him the longest. I sincerely believe that if I do my job, and in working with all of you to ensure that the White House and that our partners across the agencies have all of the data that they need, while at the same time we are working across the world to bring in new trade partners, to expand access for new trade products and for all, whether it is the specialty crops or the row crops or the livestock industry, I believe, as the President mentioned in his inaugural address, that we are embarking on a Golden Age, and I also believe this is going to be a very, very big part of that. Senator McConnell. Okay. I want to shift to something Kentucky-specific that we discussed in the office. I wanted to bring it up again. Back in 2020, through the appropriations process, I managed to allocate $65 million for an agricultural research service lab at the Kentucky College of Agriculture. That was four or five years ago. Nothing has happened yet. What did happen? Well, there were a number of different regulatory trip wires that got injected into the process. In trying to meet those regulatory trip wires slowed everything down, everything down, everything down. I want to see construction begin. The money is there. What can you tell me, to give me hope? Ms. Rollins. We did discuss this, and again, another passion of mine, that has been mentioned, is my love for Texas A&M and the Ag School and the research facilities. I am really excited to get knee-deep, waist-deep, neck-deep in these facilities across the country. I know we also had discussions with some of the others Senators on this Committee that they have some similar concerns with some different facilities that they would like to see move a lot more quickly. Senator McConnell, I commit to you that we will immediately begin digging in on what is happening. A big part of my portfolio in the last administration was the President's deregulation agenda and understanding how certain regulations and rules hampered important projects for moving forward and opening up markets, et cetera. I actually believe that with the right team in place, and with your quick confirmation of some of those under secretaries, that we will be able to dig in, figure out what is happening, work with you and others from Kentucky to figure out what is going on and figure out how to move this forward. Senator McConnell. As you say, the previous administration was big on regulations, across the board. I think they all ought to be looked at in terms of the impact on the economy, and I think that is what the new administration intends to do. Thank you. Ms. Rollins. Thank you, Senator. I agree with that and look forward to working with you and others on that. Chairman Boozman. Senator Bennet. Senator Bennet. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank you and the Ranking Member for your opening statements. Both of you together, I think, captured the spirit of what this Committee is supposed to be about in a Congress where we have not worked well together. I just want to say how much I appreciate your leadership today, the two of you. Thanks also for mentioning Chairwoman Stabenow, who did a great job here for a long period of time. Ms. Rollins, congratulations to you. You mentioned in your answer just now to Senator McConnell--this is actually not a question that I was going to ask, but since you mentioned it to him, you said we all recognize agriculture is in a tough place when it comes to exports. We do all recognize that. Could you elaborate more on that? We would love to hear your perspective on the hole that many of us feel that we are in right now, as we get ready to think about what the trade policies are going to be of this Administration and of the country. Ms. Rollins. Thank you, Senator Bennet, of course, and loved our conversation about your beautiful Colorado. Senator Bennet. Thank you. Come any time. Ms. Rollins. I would welcome that. We do spend some time there in the summers, as good Texans do, getting out of the heat. I will look forward to seeing you next time. In the last handful of years we have gone from not having a trade deficit in our agricultural communities to having a $45 billion trade deficit. Of course, that has led to many challenges, including food inflation. I know when I have heard President Trump talk about his priorities, the first is the border, which I am guessing we will get into at some point, but second was food inflation. There are many tools in our toolkit, both through USDA and expanding markets, which are all intertwined, to begin immediately to work to bring that deficit down, and hopefully soon get it to zero. My commitment is to---- Senator Bennet. I would say, though---- Ms. Rollins. Yes, sir. Senator Bennet . that deficit, we know, is being caused by a strong dollar. It is being caused by competition from Brazil. It is being caused by limitations on our beef supply. It is being caused by prices that are going up. I mean, I do not think these particularly are failures in trade policy. It is making it harder for us to export, which is what Senator McConnell's concern was, which I share. I think that all of us understand it. Actually, I will say there are many ways in which I am sympathetic to some of the trade policies that President Trump is trying to advocate for. Agriculture is already in a tough spot for those reasons, I think, largely, and we do not want it to be in a tougher spot as a result of what happens here. I think when you were in my office you talked a little bit--and this is going to be the easiest question that you get, and I hope you only take 15 seconds to answer so I can go on to the next---- Ms. Rollins. Yes, sir. Senator Bennet . which is, you know, what is your responsibility as the Secretary of Agriculture to go into the Oval Office and say, ``You have not thought through the unintended consequences that are going to flow to American agriculture if you pursue these trade policies?'' Ms. Rollins. Senator, in 15 seconds my role is to defend, to honor, to elevate our entire agriculture community, in the Oval Office, around the table, through the interagency process, and to ensure that every decision that is made in the coming four years has that front of mind as those decisions are being made. Senator Bennet. I agree also with what Senator Klobuchar said, as we have heard from our farmers and ranchers over and over again, is they want to be able to do the work. They want to be able to export. They do not want to solve this problem by getting aid to make up for what they should have been able to send to Asia and other kinds of places. The only growth that my farmers and ranchers can see in the foreseeable future, which is to say their lifetimes, is by growing our exports of agriculture. I appreciate your understanding that---- Ms. Rollins. I agree. Senator Bennet . and we are counting on you, if you are in this job, to be that advocate. We also had the chance, when you were in my office, to talk a little bit about something that I have focused on here the entire time I have been on this Committee, which is the state of our national forests throughout the American West. As you know, and I know you know this, they are incredibly important to us because every single community that we have, no matter how big or no matter how small, every single farm and ranch that we have is downstream from these snowpacks and downstream from these national forests. The condition of these national forests--and they are national forests for a reason, you know, they are national forests--the condition is just untenable and dangerous. I told Chuck Schumer, he does not necessarily agree with me, but I have told him over and over again that these forests are more important infrastructure from our perspective than the Lincoln Tunnel is to New York. If the Lincoln Tunnel is closed, there are other things you can do. He may not agree with that. If we lose our water, we lose everything in the West. Coloradans are watching what is going on now in California, Senator Schiff, with broken hearts because of what is happening there. We have seen it happen at a much smaller scale, but still universal in our state with things like the Marshall Fire. I wonder if you could talk a little bit about the importance of these national forests, how you think about the stewardship, whether or not we should be considering the fact that if we wait to fight these fires, it costs $50,000 an acre to fight them, whereas if we do the work on the front end, putting people to work in our national forests, it can cost $1,400 an acre to do it. I would love to hear your perspective on this. Ms. Rollins. Senator, I am so glad you brought this up, and I believe--and Senator Schiff and I spoke about this, obviously, in his office a week or two ago, as they were facing an unimaginable experience in California. I am really excited to tackle this problem. I do not pretend to even know the beginnings of it. I have just started studying it. It seems to me, and after speaking with you and others on the Committee and beginning to learn, first of all, I think we have a great Under Secretary identified and announced, the quicker we can get him confirmed, the quicker we can really begin this hard work ahead. My husband's family owns a little cabin right on the edge of a national forest in Gunnison, Colorado, so I, too, have spent about the last 25 years enjoying the national forests and the extraordinary beauty that they bring to our people. The water is a massive issue, and you and I talked about that. Forty million people depend on the water that is under your land in Colorado. I do believe, and people call me a pathological optimist, but maybe the pathological optimist in me sincerely believes that we can fix this, and we can fix it fairly quickly, with the right team in place, and working with all of you who have watched it, been frustrated by it, and want an answer. Chairman Boozman. Senator Hoeven. Senator Hoeven. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank, or express to both you and to the Ranking Member that I think we are fortunate to have both of you in the role of Chairman and Ranking Member. We have worked on many things in the past together, and I very much look forward to working with you in the future. Again, I feel this Committee is fortunate to have both of you in these roles. Welcome. Ms. Rollins. Thank you. Senator Hoeven. Ms. Rollins, good to see you again. Thanks for coming to visit at the office. You have an awesome family. Ms. Rollins. The best. The best. Senator Hoeven. Yes, so thanks, of course, for your husband being here, and your kids. Of course, no one will ever love you the way your mom does. Ms. Rollins. That is true. Senator Hoeven. Pretty awesome having Mom. Ms. Rollins. She is missing an important vote in Texas today to be here to sit behind me, so I am really grateful, really grateful. Senator Hoeven. It is great. You have a fantastic family. We mentioned all this talk about A&M. Did I tell you, when we talked, that my wife went to UT? I do not know if I did or not. Ms. Rollins. We did, and I had my sincerest condolences. Senator Hoeven. Yes, yes. That is kind of fun. I am wearing my North Dakota State University tie today, home of the Mighty Bison. I know we talked about them. We do have an incredible School of Agriculture at North Dakota State University. Ms. Rollins. Yes, you do. Senator Hoeven. We are doing some awesome things. We have a project called Grand Farm. Sonny Perdue came out and actually cut the ribbon on it. We have a partnership between ARS, NDSU, and Grand Farm on precision agriculture that is incredible. I am going to invite you to come out to our state right away and see what we are doing. Would you commit to coming out and seeing what we have and meeting our folks? Ms. Rollins. I would love to come visit. I have said, I think it has actually been reported in the press that if you can get me on a horse, I would love to ride a horse, as we are all working on all of these issues across the states, and I really look forward to that--only if you ride with me, though. Senator Hoeven. Oh, absolutely. We will absolutely ride. One of my sisters raced barrels. My job was just to get the horses in the trailer, which, as you know, is sometimes---- Ms. Rollins. Harder than racing barrels, yes. Senator Hoeven . sometimes easy and sometimes not, depending on the horse. We will do it. Ms. Rollins. That sounds great. Senator Hoeven. I am so glad to hear that. Of course, I love your background in ranching. My grandfather was a cattle rancher, back in the good old days when he raised Hereford instead of all the Angus. Ms. Rollins. Love Herefords. Senator Hoeven. Farm bill. Will you commit to work with us to get a farm bill? It is so incredibly important, in agriculture, as you know, we have a system of family based farmers and ranchers across this country. Sixteen million people involved in agriculture in some way, shape, or form. Versus look at all these other industries that are concentrated. We have this system of family based farmers and ranchers, businesses, small businesses. What they produce for every single American, every single day, is the highest quality, lowest cost food supply in the world. Americans have better choices, better quality, and spend less of their budget on food than almost any other developed country. That is what we have because we have good farm policy. That means affordable crop insurance, and that means a countercyclical safety net that works, keeping the farm in the farm bill. Will you commit to help us get that--we are past due. We need to get it done. Will you commit to help us get it done, and get it done in the way I described? Ms. Rollins. Yes, sir, and again, it may be the pathological optimist in me, but I have talked to both sides of the aisle, the complexity, the challenges in the last year or so of reauthorizing it. I hope that I can be a force multiplier, and I hope what I bring to the table is the opportunity to work alongside both sides to get us where we need to be for our farmers and ranchers, and some security, some understanding that the net is there, and that the loans are there, and that the insurance is there, and that they can continue to be the best producers in the world for the world food supply. I really look forward to that, obviously providing you the technical assistance that you need to be able to do your job, but also, if asked or if called, to help in any other way I can to get this done. Senator Hoeven. I think your relationship with President Trump is going to be incredibly important in that effort. We already saw it as we worked on the disaster piece that we included with the extension of the farm bill. Will you commit to work closely not only with this Committee but with our Ag Approps Committee, as we administer that emergency assistance? Ms. Rollins. One hundred percent yes. Whether that is at two in the morning, four in the morning, midnight, I am always available and will work harder than anyone to ensure that you all have everything you need across the Capital. Senator Hoeven. The President's help there was important, and I want---- Ms. Rollins. Indeed. Senator Hoeven . that acknowledged on the record. Also, tariffs. We went through this, you know, in President Trump's first term. I worked with Sonny Perdue when China targeted our farmers and ranchers. We want markets. Talk for a minute about--I mean, we look at tariffs as a way to get markets for our farmers and ranchers, so that they can compete on a level playing field. We did have to do the MFP. We worked with Sonny to do that last time. Give me your thoughts on how we are going to approach this. Ms. Rollins. As I mentioned, when I got the call about this particular position from the President, we were driving our motor home across Mississippi, on our way to Auburn for the Texas A&M-Auburn Alabama game. I clearly was not expecting a call from the President at that moment. When it came, and when we talked about this job, I celebrated, prayed with my family, and then immediately began understanding what happened last time, and ensuring that we have the right team on the field that can immediately execute to ensure that we are solving for these major challenges. The Under Secretary that will be coming before you, hopefully very quickly, Mr. Chairman, helped run that program under Sonny Perdue. The staff that he is building out, if confirmed, is the same team that did it before, with the idea that we cannot reinvent the wheel. We have got to be able to move quickly. Senator Hoeven. That is good to hear because we did have to do some things legislatively to get it rocking and rolling, and we did work with Fortis and the other guys. We look forward to working with them again, so that whether it is China or anybody else knows we are going to defend our guys, and we are going to make them play fair. Because on a level playing field, our farmers and ranchers outcompete anybody in the world. Ms. Rollins. Yes, sir. Yes, sir. Senator Hoeven. On just a couple of others, one is the sugar industry is huge in my state. That involves trade very direct, as you know. Will you commit to work with me on that industry? Senator Klobuchar also shares that same concern, I think. Ms. Rollins. Yes, sir. In fact, Senator Smith and I discussed it, as well, when I met with her. Senator Hoeven. Absolutely, Senator Smith. Ms. Rollins. I know. Do not leave out Senator Smith, my Minnesota Senators. Senator Hoeven. I want to emphasize Senator Smith shares that concern. Ms. Rollins. Yes, yes. Thank you, Senator. Yes, 100 percent. Any of these industries, I am here and will always be available. Senator Hoeven. We have also worked with your potential Deputy Secretary, as well. I want your commitment, both on behalf of yourself and him, that you will work with us on access on the forest lands, which as you know, we have ag and many other interests out there, on these forests, on the national grasslands. Access is an issue. We need your help. Will you commit to help us on that? Ms. Rollins. One hundred percent. Senator Hoeven. Thank you. Ms. Rollins. Yes, sir. Thank you, Senator. Senator Klobuchar. . Thank you very much, Ms. Rollins. Senator Boozman had to go vote. You noted, which I appreciate, we have not one but two Minnesota Senators. We are blessed to have Senator Smith with us. Senator Smith. Senator Smith. Thank you so much, Ranking Member. I want to just say I share my congratulations to you and to Chair Boozman for leading this Committee. I love serving on this Committee. I love the bipartisan spirit that we have, and I even love Senator Hoeven, who always forgets that I care about sugar in Minnesota. Ms. Rollins. She even loves you, Senator Hoeven. Senator Smith. Welcome to you and your family. I can see how proud your family is of you, and I appreciated very much our conversation in my office. I also appreciate your Minnesota roots and connection in Clear Lake, Minnesota, so thanks for that. We have lots to talk about, and I am going to get right to it. I wanted to start out by just raising the issue of ethanol and sugar, and I am so glad that Senator Klobuchar and Senator Hoeven have touched on those two issues, both of which are vitally important to Minnesota agriculture. You know, ethanol is home-grown energy. It is a major economic driver in Minnesota, $7 billion to our economy. Similarly, the national sugar program supports more than 151,000 jobs in our country, and contributes $23 billion a year to the U.S. economy, and it is run with zero cost to U.S. taxpayers. I appreciate your commitment to work with us on those two important programs. Let's turn to rural development. You come from a small town, and I represent a state filled with small towns and rural places, places that are full of energy and creativity and innovation and talent. I think we also know that small towns and rural communities face unique challenges. I sometimes think that people forget that the rural development side of the USDA is really important. That portfolio is very important. I will be honest. I am fearful that the work done there, those efforts, not being well understood, could become the target for budget cutting. I also know that American farmers and ranchers really trust the USDA on those issues. They do not want to see those programs farmed out to other agencies, where we are all worried that they would just get less attention. We talked about this when you were in my office, and I appreciate that. Let's dive in on a couple of issues, two big rural development issues: housing and childcare. We know we have a serious shortage of affordable housing in rural communities. These are places where our elders and folks that live on fixed incomes, people who make our food system work, it is where they live. For decades, the Rural Housing Service at the USDA has helped in those communities, and everyone agrees it needs to be modernized and updated. Last Congress, Senator Rounds and I introduced the Rural Housing Service Reform Act to do that. We had 14 bipartisan co- sponsors. I want to ask you first, Ms. Rollins, can you talk a bit about your vision for how the USDA can engage on rural housing, and will you work with me on rural housing service reform, as we are describing in our bill? Ms. Rollins. Thank you, Senator Smith, and I think of all of the portfolios, if confirmed, that I am taking on, the one that excites me the most is the opportunity to put forward a vision and build a program around revivifying, restoring, and bringing back rural America. Clearly, the Federal Government itself cannot do that, or there are going to be many, many factors. The idea that we, at USDA, can lead that effort, that it is not just about elevating our farmers and ensuring our ranchers are protected, and that USDA is doing everything they can to defend them. It is an all approach. It is housing. It is childcare. It is education. It is all of the above. One of the things I think I bring to the table, and I, Senator Smith, you and I, and even Senator Klobuchar, discussed this, in the last White House I led the effort called the White House Opportunity and Revitalization Council. I say I led it. We hired Scott Turner to lead it, who is now President Trump's housing nominee. You all, if you have not met him, will love meeting him, former NFL player, and just a pastor and a visionary. In that effort we were really focused on urban communities and the disadvantaged communities within those urban communities. Over the course of many months, across the agencies, across the government under President Trump, we focused on the myriad of programs that were duplicative, that tried to serve the same constituency, that sometimes were fine but other times was not a great use of dollars. Having an all-of-government approach like that, where we can really understand what role HHS plays, what role housing plays, and doing it quickly, so we can begin to roll it out. A final thing I will say, and I know, Senator, you have got one more question. America at 250, which America turns 250 next year, is going to be an incredible opportunity for us to take this message to every corner of rural America, and to really get people focused on it. Senator Smith. I appreciate that very much, and I think we do need to bring that message. We also need to make sure that we are supporting, and improving wherever we can, those rural development programs at USDA, and not throwing them under the bus, because I can tell you that they are counted on by folks in rural communities. I hope that we will be able to work together on that. Ms. Rollins. I look forward to it. Senator Smith. Ms. Rollins, I want to just touch, in the time that I have left, on the nutrition programs at USDA. You know, nutrition programs are foundational for healthy Americans. Two-thirds of SNAP recipients are families with children, one-third are families with older adults or people with disabilities. SNAP is a rural development tool. In Minnesota, rural communities have the highest food insecurity in the whole state, and in this country, nine out of ten countries with the highest food insecurity rates are rural. Ms. Rollins, can you talk to me about how you see the rules around SNAP? Let's start with what you think about work requirements for SNAP. Ms. Rollins. Well, first, I understand this is an incredibly important issue to everyone on the Committee. My commitment is to ensure that we have the data, the research, and the understanding of this program, to make sure that we are serving those that need it. As I mentioned earlier, raised by a single mom in a rural community with two little sisters, she worked at the library, she made $5 an hour. I understand it. Senator Smith. Is it your view that we need to adjust or change the work requirements for SNAP? Ms. Rollins. It probably will be no surprise to everyone on this Committee, both Republican and Democrat, and through a course of 20 years of being a policy leader, that I do believe in work requirements. I do think they are important. I do think--and I do not fully understand, but plan to get more in the weeds on this, if confirmed--and working with all of you to make sure that your concerns are part of that education process for me. Senator Smith. My view, and, in fact, I think this is the official view of the USDA, is that SNAP should ensure that no one fears going hungry in this country, but also that it reflects the importance of work and responsibility in this country. That is why SNAP has extensive work requirements in place. Folks that are not required to work under SNAP, a very small number, it is because they are taking care of a child or an incapacitated person, because they are participating in an alcohol or a drug treatment program, because they are already working under some other program. I ask you to consider this as you look at this, because again, I do not think that this is a good place to be looking for extra dollars when we have so many people that are struggling with food insecurity, even though they are working one or maybe two or three jobs. Thank you. I know I am out of time. Ms. Rollins. Thank you, Senator. I commit to working with you, and I look forward to it. Senator Klobuchar. Thank you very much, Senator Smith. Next up, Senator Ernst, our neighbor to the south. Senator Ernst. Yes, thank you to our Ranking Member, Amy Klobuchar, and a great neighbor, as has been mentioned many times over, between Minnesota and Iowa. Amy has worked with me on so many different agriculture-and biofuel-related issues. I am excited to work with you, Senator Klobuchar, you and Chairman Boozman, as we work on a 5-year farm bill. It is very important that we get that done, and it is something that I hear continuously from Iowans as I travel all 99 counties in my great state. Of course, to you, Mrs. Brooke Rollins, thank you so much for being here today, and thank you for bringing your friends and family. I know how important that support is, and I am excited to see you as our nominee for Secretary of Agriculture. I know you are an ag girl at heart. We have talked about it at length. I truly am too, and I do have full confidence in your ability to lead this Department, full faith and confidence in this role. Ms. Rollins, something that you and I talked about, I will start with this one, we talked about it at length, is telework. I know that we must address some of the work policies for federal employees at the Department of Agriculture. As you know, the GAO reported USDA's headquarters has a space utilization rate at just 11 percent--11 percent. I have even received whistleblower letters from employees describing the building as a ghost town. Last year I addressed this exact issue with then-Secretary Tom Vilsack, and was met with very strong opposition. Rather than provide any evidence to dispute the GAO's numbers, and even after repeatedly following up with his staff, he refused to give me specific in-office numbers or building utilization data. In stark contrast, President Trump acted immediately to get our federal workforce back to actually working for the American people. Ms. Rollins, in line with these efforts, what is your plan to achieve the 60 percent utilization goal for your headquarters buildings, which has been set by Congress? Second, will you commit to requiring each USDA employee to show up to the office? Ms. Rollins. Senator Ernst, thank you, and I really loved our time. We first started talking about this way before even the election. Senator Ernst. Way back. Ms. Rollins. I love your intense focus on ensuring that those who are hired and paid by taxpayer dollars are fully committed to serve in the most effective way, wherever and for whomever they work. That is, I believe, being in an office almost every single time. It is not my belief alone. Obviously, President Trump has been talking about this. I believe there was even an executive order in the last day or two, calling for the same. I do look forward to getting into the office, hopefully very soon, and really working to effectuate the most effective workforce that the United States Department of Agriculture has ever had in the history of this country, and so doing ensuring that they are all in the office to make that happen. Senator Ernst. Wonderful. Thank you for that commitment. Another area that has been brought up quite frequently here on the dais, and one that will not be a surprise to you, but another area that is critically important for my Iowa farmers is biofuels. It is a key source of demand for our corn and our soybeans. During the Biden administration, this industry really did suffer from deflated renewable, or the RVOs. The last-minute announcements on sales of E-15 and the lack of clear tax policy guidance on the 45Z Clean Fuel Production Credit, which is something that Roger Marshall, Senator Marshall of Kansas, and I were just discussing. Many of these moves have forced plants to idle or stop production completely. This is a huge issue for us. This is threatening hundreds of rural jobs and squeezing grain prices in the process. I do applaud President Trump for making E15 a priority. He did have an executive order on that. I do look forward to securing a permanent fix in law. We will need an all-hands-on-deck approach for crafting future RVOs that reflect production capacity and guidance on the 45Z that will support American farmers. Ms. Rollins, the USDA has a very big role to play when crafting these policies. As Secretary, will you commit to supporting biofuels and working with me to provide certainty for our farmers and the entire renewable fuel industry? Ms. Rollins. Yes, Senator, and I really look forward to that. I think there is no question where President Trump stands on this. I believe, if memory serves me correct, there was even an executive order on this in the last administration. It did not come out of Domestic Policy. It came out of Larry Kudlow's NEC, so I did not work on that directly. I know the courts, I believe, overturned it and correctly stated that the Congress should take that up. I really look forward to working with you, but also with my friend, Lee Zeldin, if confirmed, over at EPA, on a piece of this, on the 45Z, with my friend, Scott Bessent over at Treasury. I think that you all will find, and hopefully be encouraged, that the Cabinet, if confirmed, we all know each other, are friends, many of us are like family, and we really, really are looking forward to working together on these cross- agency issues, like the ones that you have just outlined. Senator Ernst. That is wonderful. I really appreciate that because in the last administration I have to say that in conversations with the leaders at all of those agencies we were really blown off and left swinging in the breeze. I anticipate that President Trump will want to do right by our farmers and those that are producing renewable fuels. Another issue, just very quickly, Ms. Rollins, top of mind for Iowa's ag community is Proposition 12. We are the number one hog producer in the United States, number one hog producing state. California's ballot initiative has been very devastating for our family farms and is only fueling market consolidation of pork producers. Just ultimately what we would like to do is move on legislation to craft a way forward so that we do not have states telling our producers how they can raise their livestock. Very important to us. Ms. Rollins, in line with President Trump's priority to lower food costs for American families, will you commit to working with this Committee to reverse Proposition 12? Ms. Rollins. Proposition 12--and I have just, in the last few months, become very acquainted with it--you know, the idea that one state--and listen, I am a federalism believer. I believe in the founders' vision of the Tenth Amendment and the Government closest to the people is the Government that should be most active under that Tenth Amendment. This particular issue, I believe from even a bipartisan perspective, there is no doubt that it is not just affecting California. It is affecting multitudes of other states, multitudes of other parts of the ag community, including our hog family farms. Iowa, but many other states, have been really affected by this, as well. I know that you guys, if you already have a bill filed, you are soon to file one, legislation has been drafted. Yes, I commit to working with you on that and look forward to it. Senator Ernst. Excellent. Thank you, Ms. Rollins, and I look forward to hosting you in Iowa on an ag and biofuels tour, and I would welcome your family, as well. Thank you very much, and I yield back. Chairman Boozman. . Senator Durbin. Senator Durbin. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mrs. Rollins, I took your advice. When we met yesterday you told me about your mother's agenda as a Texas State Representative on the issue of PFAS, and I should make a point of meeting her. She was the first person I met in the room today. Ms. Rollins. She is special, isn't she, Senator? Senator Durbin. Sure is, and it looks like we are going to have a possibility of a real bipartisan state-federal alliance on an issue important to everybody. I am glad she came, and I am glad I had a chance to meet her. Ms. Rollins. Thank you, sir. Senator Durbin. We talked about a lot of things yesterday, and I want to talk about one that is in the headlines this morning and will be for a long time, the mass deportation of undocumented people from the United States. I mentioned to you that I had been surprised by the response I received among farmers and ranchers and people involved in agriculture when it comes to the immigration issue. I told you about the dairy farmer who said, ``Senator Durbin, we're going to close down our dairy operation after three generations in our family because we need immigrant workers for dairy operations in Illinois.'' Another young lady with the Farm Bureau raised her hand and said, ``While you're at it, include the orchards. Who's going to pick this crop? It isn't the local kids at the high school. They won't even man the fruit stand out by the highway, and I put an air conditioner in there. I can't get them to come to work for me. I need immigrant workers.'' It turns out that 40 percent of the farm workers in this country are undocumented, and you know what that means--they are vulnerable to being deported. If they are deported, what are the farmers going to do? For a lot of them, and for a lot of different industries, immigration is critical. Now your organization has said some things, pretty strong things, your America First Policy Institute. They have called for deportation at a scale that actually matters and massive deportation efforts. I just need to ask you, what is your policy on immigration? We have got to get down to the real world, not the criminals. We do not want them, they should not come here, and they should not stay. Those who work every single darn day to pick a crop that American people are not going to pick themselves, and most of them--I should not say most--40 percent are undocumented. Can we expect this Administration to be raiding farms and going after the immigrant farm workers? Ms. Rollins. Senator, thank you, and I really was grateful for our time yesterday and our time working together in the last administration, and I appreciate your kindness. I was a little late yesterday. There was some confusion, and you gave me a little grace, so I really appreciate that. Yes, Senator Lujan, you, as well. Listen, the President's vision of a secure border and a mass deportation at a scale that matters is something I support. I was his Domestic Policy Director in the last White House. I have built and led an organization, alongside Chad Wolfe, our former Secretary of Homeland Security, at the America First Policy Institute. I want to be extremely transparent, and I think that you deserve that. That is my commitment is to help President Trump deploy his agenda in an effective way, while, at the same time, defending, as if confirmed Secretary of Agriculture, our farmers and ranchers across this country. Having both of those, which you may argue is in conflict, but having both of those is key priorities. My job is to work with, if confirmed, the Secretary of Labor, Lori Chavez-DeRemer, from Oregon, but she herself has family farms in California and Oregon, to work with her on the H-2A program, to also work with all of you, to reform and perhaps modernize that H-2A program. I will also say that the President has been very clear that this first round will be aimed at, as you mentioned, those who have committed crimes and are criminals while inside our borders over the last fouryears. We will follow the data. We will follow and listen to our farmers and ranchers as this is moving. My commitment is to work with all of you to work to solve and do everything we can to make sure that none of these farms or dairy producers are put out of business. Senator Durbin. I support your answer. Dangerous people should not be here, and if they are here they should be gone, period. When we are talking massive deportation we are going beyond dangerous criminals. I just wonder if we ought to give fair warning to farmers and ranchers across America that if you have immigrant labor you can expect federal agents to come and search your property. Is that in the future for farmers and ranchers under the mass deportation plan? Ms. Rollins. Sir, I have not been involved in that, the President's current plan. I cannot answer that one way or the other. I do know that my job is to ensure that as those conversations are ongoing, if confirmed, that I am part of that data collection and understanding, and that the President understands what this means to our agriculture community. I believe, sincerely, that he will execute his agenda that he has promised the American people, but that we will never forget our ag community in so doing. Senator Durbin. Well, I certainly hope so, because these men and women in immigrant labor on our farms are doing back- breaking work every single damn day, and they have done it for years, and many of them, 40 percent of them, are undocumented. If they are going to be deported then we are going to see a lot fewer fruits and vegetables that we take for granted every time we go into the store. I think that is part of the reality. When it comes to the SNAP program, the work requirement and the asset requirements, do you think we ought to apply work and asset requirements to other agricultural programs? Ms. Rollins. Senator Durbin, I look forward to learning more about those. I have actually spent most of my time on SNAP in preparing for this hearing. I am obviously aware there are 16 other nutrition programs across the United States Department of Agriculture. I look forward to learning more about all of those, meeting with those that are running them, even looking across the agencies to see whom else is working on these projects, and ensuring that they are the most effective for those who need them but also the most efficient for the taxpayer. Senator Durbin. I am going to ask one last question. Project 2025, you are familiar with, calls for capping crop insurance payouts to $40,000 per farmer and terminating longtime USDA export promotion programs. What is your position on this Project 2025 proposal? Ms. Rollins. Sir, the America First Policy Institute was not involved at all in Project 2025. We were in no meetings. We were not part of any policy process and had nothing to do with it. I am sorry, I do not know that I can answer that specifically. I will say that my role is to defend farmers and ranchers in our ag communities, in our rural communities, with everything I have. As I am looking at all of these programs, aside from anything that other think tanks put together, my commitment is to ensure that we follow the data and protect our ag community. Senator Durbin. Thank you. Ms. Rollins. Thank you. Chairman Boozman. Senator Hyde-Smith. Senator Hyde-Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and congratulations to our nominee. I am so proud of you and so excited to get to work with you. I think it is really neat that you got the call from President Trump, and I believe you were in Newton, Mississippi. Ms. Rollins. Newton, Mississippi, in the Walmart parking lot. That is when the call came. Senator Hyde-Smith. When you got the call on your way to the Auburn game, and I believe that went into three overtimes, if I remember correctly. Ms. Rollins. It did, and the Aggies once again ran out of time, which is our November sort of game plan these days. Senator Hyde-Smith. Well, that was a super exciting day---- Ms. Rollins. Thank you. Senator Hyde-Smith . for sure, no doubt. It was so nice to get to meet Mark out at the National Finals Rodeo. Thank you for accepting the invitation to come there. I want to highlight two important things before diving into the questions, and that is the supplemental that was passed before Christmas. I just want to thank Senator Boozman, and I want to thank Senator Collins on how incredibly important that was, to get that into that bill, that $10 billion that will make a total difference in the survival of so many producers throughout the nation. Thank you for that. That certainly did not go unnoticed by the ag world. I wanted to talk to you about catfish. Mississippi is the top producing state of catfish, our farm-raised catfish, and it is a huge contributor to our rural economy throughout the state. Our neighbors in Arkansas and Alabama are right there with us. Unfortunately the foreign catfish imports, primarily Vietnam and China, have really hurt the industry. My greatest concern--now that imports are being inspected by USDA's Food Safety and Inspection Service, which is charged with inspecting all those imported catfish--I have been very concerned about how that has been implemented. FSIS is far more rigorous than the Food and Drug Administration inspection, but the inspection has not been at the top of the priority list for the last administration. That made a big, huge difference because there could be dangerous carcinogens in those imports, many elements that are harmful to human consumption that were getting by and not inspected. If confirmed, will you work to ensure that FSIS tightens its imported catfish inspection responsibilities? Ms. Rollins. Yes, ma'am. I really look forward to all aspects of the United States Department of Agriculture, but have heard from several of you that the inspection part of it could be significantly improved. My commitment is to do everything I can to do just that. We are close to announcing an Under Secretary--I should say the President is close to announcing an Under Secretary--in that role, and I think everyone will be very pleased when that announcement is made, and look forward to hopefully his quick confirmation and letting us get to work, Senator. Senator Hyde-Smith. Wonderful. I have fought for that for years, as we are the top producing state there, and as Ag Commissioner in Mississippi. I also share your commitment, as you mentioned in your testimony, to addressing the H5N1 and the New World screwworm outbreaks as high consequence diseases threatening animal agriculture. I have gotten several calls lately from producers who are very concerned about that. I can remember the avian influenza threat getting to Mississippi flocks. That kept me up at night. I had plenty of foam, plenty of water on standby, that if we had the outbreak we were ready. I was also involved in reopening beef export markets after BSE, or the mad cow infection. Those markets took over a decade to recover. We had countries that did not buy our beef because of that for 13 years, until we got that under control. While much attention is given to the problem of animal disease outbreaks, I want to focus on the key solution that is often overlooked, and that is the importance of USDA veterinarians. Those are so critical, and despite the hiring freeze, those professionals are essential in protecting animal and public health and ensuring food security because of these outbreaks. The vets are currently managing the H5N1 outbreak by testing meat and milk and helping producers with biosecurity practices. Unfortunately, USDA has struggled for years with inadequate veterinarian staffing, and with the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, and with APHIS, a problem was made worse by a compensation system that the previous Secretary described as just uncompetitive in a hearing in last Congress. I tried to work with the previous administration to begin correcting these serious recruitment and retention problems there, but those efforts were pretty much ignored, as well. It is just extremely frustrating to know how critical it is to make sure we have the safest, cheapest food in the entire world, and it takes inspections to do that. Hopefully that will be better, and I am going to ask for your commitment on that, as it just jeopardizes American agriculture competitiveness by putting us at further risk for spreading disease. The shortage affects public health and the situations we find ourselves in, because we just sit there and hope and pray that we do not get a call that there is an outbreak of anything. The USDA and Office of Personnel Management must address these veterinary personnel challenges. My question is, will you commit to working with me toward timely and meaningful solutions, solutions, of course, that would be in line with the President's agenda, regarding these veterinarians we need at USDA? Ms. Rollins. Senator, I so look forward to doing that. I am not sure if you have heard but Texas A&M has a heck of a good veterinary school that I am very familiar with. I especially, on this, look forward to that with you. I do think that the recruiting piece of this, and you and I working together, and I believe Senator Klobuchar may be a co-chair with you on the Veterinary Committee here in the Senate, but across the board, ensuring that your leadership and my supporting you, if confirmed, continues to be a priority, and I really look forward to that. Senator Hyde-Smith. One quick issue I want to get in, that I look forward to working with you on, as well, once confirmed We need to address the USDA Packers and Stockyards rules concerning poultry. It has really caused some significant cost increases to our poultry growers, and it really does not have any quantifiable profits. That is another thing that I would like to meet with you on is Packers and Stockyards, the law that we all live by. Thank you so much, and I so look forward to supporting you. Ms. Rollins. Thank you, Senator, so much. Chairman Boozman. Senator Booker. Senator Booker. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. I am excited to be here and excited to have a few moments with you. Thank you for coming by my office yesterday. I know I was the favorite office you visited, much more than---- Ms. Rollins. You were the favorite--there were three favorites, and you were one of the three. Senator Booker. I am glad to hear that. I know you liked my visit better than Tommy Tuberville.  Senator Booker. I am going to jump on the moving mom bandwagon here, when you told me about the work she did, the work on PFAS, God, I hope it foreshadows some of the work we can do together. It is a real problem for American farmers, and it is something that is really important to me. I mentioned to you, when you were with me, that one of the biggest problems we have in America is that the biggest producers in our country have done well. That is not a problem. I love and celebrate American success. We are having a problem with the big, big producers, often controlled by multi-national corporations, who are doing great, but most of our small farmers in America really continue to struggle. Since 2017, we have lost over 140,000 farms in our country, and since the 1970's, over half a million farms have been lost in this country. This loss of family farms has led to awful things happening in our rural communities, an exodus of residents, jobs, really the hollowing out of rural communities. For the farmers who have managed to hang on, times are really tough for American farmers. Eighty-eight percent of family farmers have second jobs off the farms, and a majority of that income utilized by those families is generated from off-farm income. Right now the USDA programs are structured in ways that serve well the biggest producers but often do not work for small and mid-sized family farms. I am pushing in the upcoming farm bill to create an Office of Small Farms within the USDA that would be charged with looking at USDA programs and policies and finding ways to make them work for our small farmers. This is a crisis. We are losing our heritage. Families that have had farms for five, six generations in America are really struggling. This is just a yes-or-no question, which I got in private and I am hoping to get in public. As Secretary, will you make it a priority for the USDA to do a lot more to help small farmers? Ms. Rollins. One zillion percent yes, which is Aggie math, because you can only get to 100 percent yes. One hundred percent yes. Senator, we discussed yesterday, for me, personally, that is where my heart is and my passion, in restoring rural America and working together in all parts of our country. Senator Booker. I am grateful. I am going to say hallelujah, amen to your answer, and remind you that your mother is watching.  Ms. Rollins. Yes, sir. Senator Booker. All right. As you know, we are also facing a global hunger crisis. Millions of people are in desperate need of food. For the past several years, Senator Boozman and I have worked closely with USDA to increase and expedite the USDA's purchase of commodities such as rice and wheat from U.S. farmers for shipment to countries where people are really suffering, near famine-like conditions. It is a win-win for us. The USDA purchases really help our farmers, and at the same time we are able to provide lifesaving food to children and families around the globe. I know that you and I share a deep faith. It is the motivation behind what we do in our work. You believe that the gospel calls on us to help people in need. It is also a national security issue for America, in helping to stabilize other nations that are facing crises. My office is getting a lot of concerning reports from farmers that humanitarian programs like Food for Peace may be paused by one of the recent executive orders. I really am hoping that is not true. Again, a yes-or-no question. Once you are confirmed, will you check on the status of that, and will you make food purchases from our farmers a priority? Ms. Rollins. Yes, sir, of course. Senator Booker. Fantastic. Meatpackers--most Americans do not know this--they work in really horrifically dangerous conditions, one of the most dangerous jobs in America. They are being forced to make repetitive motions every day, forceful ones. The USDA published recently a report showing that a current line speeds, 81 percent of chicken processing plant workers are at an elevated risk, significantly so, of developing debilitating upper body disorders and things like carpal tunnel syndrome. These workers also face a risk of serious injuries. On average, two worker amputations per week occur on slaughter lines in the United States of America. Just imagine if that was your family member. Even worse, meatpacking giants like JBS have admitted, and been fined, for child labor violations in their processing plants. The USDA currently is one of the largest buyers from these big meatpackers. I have a bill with Senator Josh Hawley. It is a bipartisan bill to stop federal contracting with companies with child labor violations. As Secretary, yes or no, will you commit to using the agency's purchasing power to force these companies to end these horrific abuses, child labor practices, and bad treatment of workers? Ms. Rollins. Senator Booker, I look forward to working with you on that. I have not spent enough time to fully understand to commit one way or the other. I absolutely look forward to working with you and learning more about this issue. Senator Booker. Senator Hawley and I will definitely talk to you more. I am grateful for that, yes, and I am going to speed to my last question. Ultra-processed foods in school meals, we are facing a crisis--you talked about it earlier--with our children. Thirty- eight percent of teenagers in America have pre-diabetes, among other often chronic diseases. We have a sickness epidemic in American children. We know that if kids reach adulthood obese, they are on a trajectory of a lifetime of sickness and suffering that will cost our health care system inordinate amounts and cost them, as well. We know that 60 percent of children's calories--60 percent--currently come from ultra-processed foods. Many of them have unhealthy levels of salt and added sugar. With our school meal program we have an opportunity to make sure that kids get healthy, nutritious meals that empower them in school that day and for their life. Right now, kids are still getting too many of their calories in schools from ultra-processed meals. Yes or no, if confirmed, will you commit to dealing with this crisis and really focusing on improving children's nutrition by reducing the amount of ultra-processed foods in our school meal program? Ms. Rollins. The answer is yes, but I want to add to that, if you do not mind. As I mentioned with Chairman Boozman, I do think this is a crisis, and I do agree with you. I think before my friend, RFK Jr., Bobby Kennedy, came on the scene--I believe that was in August, and became part of the America First movement--that this particular issue, while really important, was not necessarily at the top of the America First agenda. At AFPI, America First, we had some people working on it but did not expect it to be a priority in the Administration. I am encouraged that it is now a priority, and I look forward to working with everyone. Senator Booker. I am so grateful for that. This is not a question because my time has expired. Prop 12 coming out of California, Packers and Stockyards Act, I know you will be open to us bringing you small family farmers, independent family farmers, who show that Prop 12 has opened up new opportunities for them, and the Packers and Stockyards Act is protecting them, and they actually want to see better enforcement. I know you are open to us having that conversation. Ms. Rollins. I will look forward to that. Thank you, Senator. Senator Booker. Thank you. Chairman Boozman. Senator Marshall. Senator Marshall. Thank you, Chairman, Ranking Member. Ms. Rollins, welcome. Ms. Rollins. Thank you. Senator Marshall. I just want to know if you agree with me that whole milk is the most nutritious drink known to humankind and belongs in our school lunches.  Ms. Rollins. Senator, I do not know that you have met my mom yet, but this is all we had in our refrigerator growing up, not anything else, just whole milk. She is absolutely never going to let us forget this, the fact that this is coming up. Yes, this hits home to me very quickly. It brings back a lot of memories. Senator Marshall. Ms. Rollins, like many of us on this Committee, you have a love, a passion, for rural America, for agriculture. Tell us where that comes from and why this job is important to American agriculture and rural America. Just from your heart. Ms. Rollins. Senator, thank you. The fact that I am sitting here today, that I am in the United States Capitol, that I am sitting in front of this Committee, that I am serving at the appointment of the President of the United States as one of his potential Cabinet Members, but yet I grew up in a town of 1,200, with a single mom, with two little sisters, went to Texas A&M on an agriculture scholarship because it was my love but also we needed the money, that Future Farmers of America is the organization that set my path so many years ago, I am fighting for the next Brooke who is growing up in a little bitty town with a single mom, that her weekends are spent on horses and raising cattle and barrel racing and Friday night football, at least in the South, and making sure that those communities continue to raise and provide thriving and incredible opportunities for the next generation of leaders so that this country can continue, in the next 250 years, to do what we have done in the last 250, and that is to create and govern, under our founders' vision, of the greatest country in the history of the world. This work and this Committee and this moment in time is the backbone to all of that. Senator Marshall. Yes, Ms. Rollins, it reminds me of the song, that growing up a Kansas farm boy is mostly having fun. I think that is what you are describing. Ms. Rollins. That is right. Senator Marshall. It was mostly having, it was a simpler time. You pointed out earlier, 90 percent of rural America supported President Trump in the election, over 90 percent. Now every time I see the President, the first thing he asks me is, ``Roger, how are your farmers and ranchers doing in Kansas?'' Can you just share with this Committee President Trump's passion, compassion, for farmers and ranchers. Do you have similar conversations with him, as well? Ms. Rollins. Yes. Senator, one of the illuminating moments of my time with him in the last administration, and it was, as you can imagine, an adventure, beyond any imagination, to be next to President Trump for three years and then to continue to work with him after he left the White House, to build the America First Policy Institute, and continue the policies for the next 100 years, not just for this moment in time. In the last West Wing, I believe I am speaking correctly, I was the only person with an agriculture background. That was not widely known, because I was managing the entire portfolio. Any time, in any senior staff meetings, or any time we were in the Oval Office and these issues would come up, he would always point to me and say, ``Where are we on that?'' It was so clear to me that that is where his heart is. I will never forget a Cabinet meeting where we were having a discussion about some big corporate entity who had asked for a very large sum, in the multis of billions of dollars, for a project. That same week he had been asked for that project he had also visited some farmers in Georgia. I will never forget. I was sitting behind him, because I was not part of the Cabinet. I was part of the senior staff. I will never forget. I do not think the media was in there, but he looked at the entire Cabinet, and then turned over his shoulder and looked at us, who were sitting behind him as his senior team, and he said, ``I'm not here for those guys who are asking for billions of dollars for their new project and their market value is many, many billions and billions more. I'm here for those farmers. I am here for those men and women that I met in Georgia yesterday, who are hurting, but never complained, never miss a beat, never stop doing what they're called to do, which is to produce for the families across America and across the world. That is who I am here, and we all''--pointing to the Cabinet and the staff--``are here to serve.'' I think that in maybe year two of the four, and I have never forgotten it. When he called me about this job, we talked about that again. Senator Marshall. Yes, thanks, Ms. Rollins. Obviously agriculture and rural America is important to you. It is important to the President. Would you just speak for a moment how important biofuels are to the farmers, to ranchers who benefit from some of the substrates coming out of that process, and to rural America, as well, and specifically how 45Z might impact rural America. Ms. Rollins. I think that everyone knows where the President is on this, and he often jokes that there were a lot of meetings, I think a lot of you were in. Senator Grassley, I know you were in many of those in the last White House, making sure that the President fully understood the importance of exactly what you are talking about, Senator, on biofuels, and especially to our farmers. I believe that in the last 48 hours one of his executive orders on energy actually included a mention of biofuels. Also my role, if confirmed, is to defend all of American agriculture. I believe, Senator, that you and others who hail from these states where this is a driver for your farmers and your ranchers and your economy, should feel very confident that you have a friend and a defender in this current Administration to make sure this continues. 45Z, obviously, my friend, Scott Bessent, if confirmed, over at Treasury, will be working on that. That is in his purview. I will ensure that he has the data and the voices and the opinions around him to make the right decision. Senator Marshall. Yes. Just one more quick call on the 45Z. Certainly what we do not want is China to benefit from it---- Ms. Rollins. Correct. Senator Marshall . which is happening right now. We can go into that in more detail later, as well. By the way, I was just sitting here thinking, I remember President Trump, the first primary back in 2016, in Iowa, I believe he came out, was the candidate that came out in favor of biofuels, as well, as I recall. Ms. Rollins. He did. That is right. Senator Marshall. Let's finish up on the regulatory environment. I am not sure if anything is a bigger concern to the American farmer right now than the regulatory environment. The two hot-button issues have been WOTUS, Waters of the U.S., and the Endangered Species Act. Can you tell us what your involvement was in rolling back that WOTUS regulation with the previous administration, and that, I think, is a good example, going forward, of what will be happening. Ms. Rollins. I will, and I appreciate that so much because I do have extensive experience in many of these regulatory programs that in the last administration we worked to make, roll back, but also align better for the needs of our ag communities and ensure that the Waters of the United States rule did not put more farmers out of business. Same with the Endangered Species Act. I know that is also a big issue in our forestry lane, as well. I really encourage and look forward, and my policy heart is very happy at the opportunity to make those better, to understand the harm and follow the data on it, and really work with all of you to try to solve for that in the next four years. Chairman Boozman. Senator Schiff. Senator Schiff. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and at the outset I want to tell you how very grateful I am to serve on this Committee. California has not had a Senator on the Agriculture Committee for over 30 years, and as a leading agricultural state I am really proud of the industry and all the people who work in it, and grateful to have a chance to represent them on this Committee. Senator Marshall, I wanted to tell you that a California legislator once made a name for himself by drinking a beaker a malathion to demonstrate his view that he thought it was that safe. I will not be doing that today. Ms. Rollins, thank you for being here today. When we met earlier this month to discuss your nomination, firefighters in Southern California had just begun efforts to contain two blazes. As we know now, this was only the beginning of what would ultimately amount to one of the most devastating wildfire disasters in the state's history, if not the Nation's history. Over the last 2\1/2\ weeks, in L.A., it has been difficult for me to put into words how truly catastrophic these fires have been. Just the scope of them is beyond anything I would have ever imagined, whole neighborhoods and communities just wiped out. The Forest Service has been playing an amazing role in the emergency response efforts, working hand-in-hand with state and local partners to secure resources and personnel. To aid California's wildfire response, this month the Forest Service deployed 2,300 federal firefighters, 12 large air tankers, 20 helicopters, 6 scoopers, and 8 modular airborne firefighting aircraft. Without these federal resources the devastation in L.A. would have been far worse--and we are not done with it yet. We had the outbreak of another fire just yesterday. If confirmed as Secretary, are you committed to deploying the same emergency resources to fight wildfires in blue states that would be deployed to fight wildfires in red states? Can we count on you not to discriminate among states in the vigor of the federal response? Ms. Rollins. Senator, thank you, and obviously it bears saying, since you asked, 100 percent yes. To watch the devastation in your beautiful state has been heartbreaking for all of us, no matter if we are from red states or blue states. I think that hopefully, if there is any good that comes from this, if I am confirmed, we can figure out how to be even a better, more impactful resource the next time this happens, and hopefully be able to work more closely, more quickly with those on the ground, across blue states and red states. Senator Schiff. Thank you. I very much appreciate that. Wildland firefighters have been putting their lives on the line to protect my communities back home, and we need to make sure that we continue to encourage people to become wildland firefighters and that their compensation is commensurate with the critical and dangerous work that they do. I was speaking with one firefighter who was, I think, an L.A. Fire Department firefighter, not a wildland firefighter, but nonetheless facing the same risks, who told me that he was not sure he was going to make it out alive, that there were fires in front of him and behind him, his communications equipment was in and out, water was running low. He said it was the closest thing to hell that he could imagine. The key, I think, to recruiting and retaining people to do that kind of vital and dangerous work is to make sure they are well compensated. The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, signed by President Biden, included a long overdue pay raise for federal firefighters, but that raise is set to expire in March. This means our federal firefighters could once again be paid as low as $15 an hour to risk their lives to keep our communities safe. If confirmed as Secretary, are you committed to fighting to extend the pay increase so that we can continue to recruit and retain these wildland firefighters? Ms. Rollins. Thank you, Senator Schiff, and the tens of thousands of firefighters at the Forest Service, at USDA, in our peak seasons, and even now I think we have close to 1,000 on the ground in your home state. I am 100 percent behind ensuring that we have the best firefighters, the best workforce that we can possibly have to fight these fires. I need to learn more about exactly what it is you are speaking about before a full commitment. I will commit to this, that in all of my time with President Trump, in the 8-plus years I have been beside him, in serving in his administration and answering the call for this position, if confirmed, that he, too, believes that those who are putting their lives on the line every single day deserve the honor and the respect and the pay that goes along with those jobs. I look forward to working with you to ensure, as we move forward, that that is happening, in the most appropriate way. Senator Schiff. I appreciate that. Let me turn to a different topic. During the President's first term, USDA had to allocate tens of billions of dollars to offset the financial impact of the terrorists and the reciprocal terrorists that other countries imposed on our agriculture and on our farmers. That financial assistance offered to farmers impacted by the trade war was not equally distributed. Despite California's leading role in U.S. agriculture and the heavy tariffs imposed on specialty crop exports, California growers received far less than their fair share in tariff assistance under the 2019 Market Facilitation Program. Out of hundreds of specialty crops grown in the U.S., only eight crops received direct assistance, and in the end approximately 1 percent of the nearly $15 billion in USDA allocated resources went to California specialty crop growers. About 1 percent. As you know, we are the leading state when it comes to specialty crops. If confirmed, are you committed to distributing all economic assistance, including trade relief, to states without regard for their political leanings? Ms. Rollins. I am committed to that. I think, Senator Slotkin, even you and I discussed the specialty crops in Michigan when we met. I look forward to--I am not familiar with the data that you laid out, but I look forward to learning more about that and being committed to ensuring, to the very, very best of our ability, that this is appropriately adjudicated. Senator Schiff. I appreciate that. I look forward to working together to make sure that that relief, if it should be necessary, is distributed equitably. Ms. Rollins. Yes, sir. Senator Schiff. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back. Ms. Rollins. Thank you, Senator. Chairman Boozman. Senator Tuberville. Senator Tuberville. Coach. Chairman Boozman. Coach. Senator Tuberville. Thank you very much. Ms. Rollins, who would have ever known, 30 years ago, I am a young coach at Texas A&M and you are student body president, the first time we met. Ms. Rollins. That is true. We sat next to each other in lots of meetings. That is exactly right. Senator Tuberville. Look where we are at now. Ms. Rollins. I know. I know. It is an amazing world. Senator Tuberville. Congratulations. Ms. Rollins. Thank you, sir. Senator Tuberville. You are going to be awesome. Ms. Rollins. Thank you. Senator Tuberville. I do not want to sugarcoat this because my farmers back home are hurting. Ms. Rollins. Yes, sir. Senator Tuberville. We are in trouble. Our farmers are in trouble. Small farms are selling right and left. I have got a bill on the floor--actually, I dropped it yesterday--about keeping foreign adversaries from buying our farmland. We are selling it right and left. I do not blame them, because they cannot make a profit. Row croppers in my State of Alabama are really getting killed. Cotton farmers last year, the input cost was about $400 an acre. They might have gotten $100 an acre out of their crop last year. That is the reason we had to do a supplemental right before Christmas. My phone was ringing off the wall. We have got to help our farmers. They hate handouts. I will tell you that right now. They hate it, because they want to do their own work. You understand that. Being from Texas you understand it. Ms. Rollins. Yes, sir. Senator Tuberville. Again, it is a dire problem, and it not going to get fixed overnight. I am looking forward to seeing who your team is going to be around you. I will tell you this. It is discouraging to know that you walk into the office building where you are going to have three or four thousand employees, and you can shoot a gun and not hit anybody. There is nobody there. Nobody has been working in the office for four years. I mean, it is embarrassing. It is absolutely embarrassing. Our farmers need help, and we have got nobody working at the office. We have to get input costs down. That is not your job. Six, seven years ago, a cotton picker cost $750,000 in Alabama. Today it is $1.5 million. Ms. Rollins. Yes, sir. Senator Tuberville. Fertilizer has gone sky high after the Ukraine war. I mean, it is embarrassing, to where we have gotten. There is a $45 billion trade deficit in ag--$45 billion-- and the only way that we can get commodity prices back up is handle that trade deficit. That being said, we need dialog. If confirmed, will you commit on doing dialog with President Trump and the people around ag to get our farmers an opportunity to have a better price for their crop? Ms. Rollins. Yes, I will, Senator, and I so look forward to that. I think one of the things I read recently, that only 43 percent of our ag producers are net positive, net income positive. That is unsustainable. We have to find a better way, and it cannot come always through government subsidies. We have got to expand the market. We have got to figure out input costs. One of President Trump's top priorities was food inflation. Well, this comes before food inflation because this, itself, will drive the cost of food down if we do our jobs and if we are able to produce for our ag community the way that, Coach, I believe that we can, working together. Senator Tuberville. Yes. What we do not want to happen is what has happened to our drug industry. You know, we found in COVID, we look around going, you know, how do we keep people, you know, get people healthy, and all the drugs are made in China. We are going to end up in the same situation if we do not wake up and smell the roses. It is going to happen. Again, people are selling right and left, and you cannot blame them. Our small farms are going to end up being corporations like the packing houses. We have got, what, three companies now that are meatpackers, and one of them is owned by China. We are headed in a direction of unknown, and it is going to take leadership from your office to get that back on the right track. Our forest industry, in my state, $36 billion a year. Now, with the USDA Forest Service under your purview, what priorities do you have for the health of our forests across the country, not just in Alabama, but we have to continue that to make sure that we have healthy wood, because it is something that we are very proud of. Ms. Rollins. I know that is really important to Alabama and many of the other states that are represented here and across the U.S. Senate. My commitment is to hire an A++ team. We have already announced our Under Secretary, Mike Boren, for this position. I have great faith in his leadership. He is a businessman. I think bringing to the table, hopefully with a quick confirmation process from all of you, he will bring to the table a team that will take our great firefighters in the Forest Service and hopefully realign and reorganize in a way that makes the Forest Service, including forest management, more productive, more efficient, more effective, so that we do not have the issues that we have had in these last number of years, and especially for our great producers in your state and other states. Senator Tuberville. Key word--forest management. Key two words. We have got to manage our forests and do it the right way. The American people across the country that are not in this business, they should not have to pay for everything, the mistakes that we make. You know, we are broke. We are $36 trillion in debt, and it is getting worse---- Ms. Rollins. That is right. Senator Tuberville . every day, and we are printing $80,000 a second, by the way, and we cannot sustain that. The government is way too big. Ms. Rollins. Agree. Senator Tuberville. Disaster relief. If we have had problems with tornadoes or floods or whatever in my state, it takes at least three years, at times, to get any kind of disaster relief, three years. You know as well as I do, farmers borrow money from banks, for a crop, and those bankers are looking around going, ``Where is our money?'' Well, we are waiting for disaster relief. The bankers should not have to deal with that, nor should the farmers. I think there has to be a better plan for that, at the end of the day. Again, I am throwing all your problems out to you, and you probably do not want to hear that. We have got a lot of problems that need to be fixed. Ms. Rollins. Well, Senator, Coach, I believe that you and I have been in conversation with our commander in chief, and the fact that it is taking three years to get relief will be unacceptable to him. It is unacceptable to me. I look forward to working with you to ensure that we do better, much, much better than that. Senator Tuberville. Thank you. Good luck. Ms. Rollins. Thank you, sir. Thank you. Chairman Boozman. Senator Welch. Senator Welch. Thank you very much. I do not want the coach to be upset, but when he asked the question, how did you both get here, I kind of get it how you got here. I am still trying to figure out about the coach. Ms. Rollins. How Coach got here?  Senator Welch. You did another thing that is really astonishing. Senator Cruz gave you a very nice introduction. You know, I did not know something that he has kept on the down low. He actually has a sense of humor.  Senator Welch. This is a pretty astonishing hearing. Ms. Rollins. It is a new day. Senator Welch. It is. Thank you for your visit to my office and your enthusiasm about rural America. I am so delighted to be working with our new Ranking Member and our new Chair to try to strengthen rural America. I share the point of view strongly held by Members of this Committee, that rural America really is about the great values and strength of America--hard work, family, community. Rural America has been under brutal pressure, and I think every single one of us wants to do everything we can to strengthen it, because a strong rural America is a strong America. A couple of things. We have been really blessed, in Vermont, with a very responsive Department of Agriculture. The Rural Development organization in Vermont has helped us through the floods of July `23 and July `24. It has used opportunities to strengthen the economy for farmers. I just want to make certain that some of the things that have really been helpful to us, we can have some confidence will continue should you be the new Secretary of Agriculture. Number one, under the previous administration, Vermont received $40 million through the Rural Energy for America Program to help farmers and rural businesses invest in renewable energy projects or energy efficiency improvements. We do not have to have a debate about climate change and whether it is real or not, but my view is this--our farmers can help our farmers can help us deal with extreme weather events with the weather events, by doing things where they get income to sequester carbon. Without having the climate change discussion, I want to make certain that I can have some confidence that our farmers, who are adopting regenerative agricultural practices, organic agriculture, are doing things that, by all estimations, make for good, healthy crops, but also reduce carbon emissions, that we will continue to make that possible, and they will get paid to do it, not just be asked through regulations to bear the burden. Ms. Rollins. Senator Welch, thank you, and I loved visiting with you, and excited to come to Vermont, if invited. I loved our conversation, and we actually talked about the workforce at USDA, at least those that you have interacted with and worked with. Hearing from you how excellent the service was and the good job that they did meant a lot to me, and I look forward to learning more and meeting them, if confirmed. I think it is important to recognize, Senator, I will always have an open dialog with all of you. I think I gave all of you my cellphone. Senator Welch. Yes, you did. Ms. Rollins. I did. Senator Welch. Let me go on to the next one, because I just want to go through a few things. You know, another issue is labor on the farm. We cannot milk our cows without immigrant labor. I am for a secure border. I am also for legal immigration. That is a real challenge for our dairy farmers, and I want to make sure that whatever we do to secure the border does not deprive our hardworking dairy farms and farmers access to the labor that they absolutely depend on. Can you comment on that? Ms. Rollins. Senator, yes, thank you, and I appreciate everyone's commitment to a secure border. You are not the only one on this side of the room that has made the point that that is really important. I know there is great concern amongst our ag community on what immigration under President Trump will look like. My commitment to you is this, that understanding the data and understanding the impact of those in the ag community-- dairy farms, I think, especially, are concerned, but everybody is--ensuring that we are working with the nominee over at Labor, Lori Chavez-DeRemer, who is from Oregon. Senator Welch. We will work together on that. Ms. Rollins. Yes, sir. Senator Welch. And, do you appreciate the importance of having access to that labor for our dairy farms and others, as well? Ms. Rollins. I know that these cows need to be milked 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. It does not go away. If there is no one to milk them, that is big trouble. Senator Welch. I shared with you that a lot of the incredible challenges farmers have are because they do not control the weather. A lot of our small farmers are vegetable farmers. They do not have an insurance program that works for them. The insurance program for some of our vegetable folks, they only get paid wholesale, or reimbursed wholesale, when they sell at farmers markets at retail. They have to go through an incredible documentation process, where they have to report how many tomatoes they lost, how many beets they lost. I have introduced the WEATHER Act as an effort to try to streamline the reporting requirements. We have to have crop insurance programs that help not just the big commodities, which is a challenge and an obligation we have, but these smaller farmers that are the future. Can I count on working with you on that? Ms. Rollins. Well, streamline, the word ``streamline'' is my love line. Yes, you and I will absolutely work together on that. We have spent a lot of time this morning talking to everyone about restoring rural America and how important that is to the next 250 years of our country. That will happen because of our small family farms and our rural ranchers. Senator Welch. You know, another issue is it is so hard for young farmers to get into farming---- Ms. Rollins. Yes, sir. Senator Welch . largely because they cannot get the farmland. There is a lot of concern expressed here, and I share it, about Chinese possibly buying up. You know who is buying it up? It is private equity. I want farmers to be able to buy up farmland. I mean, is that of concern to you? I know having access to farmland for young farmers is, and China may be a threat, but private equity is a threat too. Care to comment? Ms. Rollins. Sir, thank you. The average farmer today, the average age is 58 years old. If we really think we are going to have a sustainable, thriving ag community in 20 or 30 or 50 years, after you and I have probably gone to meet our maker, then we have to reverse that trend. Senator Welch. Okay. The last topic in this round, rural broadband has made such a difference for rural Vermont and for our farm communities, and your Department has played a major role in facilitating that. We have to continue that and get that last barn, on the longest dirt road, wired so they have the advantages that come with access to the internet. Care to comment? Ms. Rollins. I 100 percent agree. Senator Welch. Okay. Thank you very much. Ms. Rollins. Thank you, Senator. Chairman Boozman. Senator Justice. Senator Justice. Well, first and foremost, to all of those on this Committee, you know, I thank you for allowing me to be on the Committee. I thank leader Thune, and I thank anyone that was responsible for me being here. You know, I am a plain-spoken individual. I am hung up all the time on the truth. I will promise you, with all in me, that I know a tremendous amount about agriculture. You know, I think about--and, Brooke, I cannot call you Mrs. Rollins. Ms. Rollins. You can call me Brooke. Senator Justice. I could call you Secretary. I have asked you over and over to call me Jim. Ms. Rollins. Yes, sir. Senator Justice. I would just tell you just this. All that is going to fall in your empire is astronomical. That is all there is to it. You know, I am amazed with President Trump's nominees, and that is all there is to it. They are qualified. They are absolutely experienced. They absolutely have what Brooke has. She is stuck on ``on.'' Anybody that cannot see that is absolutely not looking. She approaches it with positiveness, and a big smile. All of you that came, especially all of her family, you know, I am not amazed in any way. I know she is infectious around every last one of you, and absolutely you will be a tremendous Secretary. Ms. Rollins. Thank you, Senator. Senator Justice. That is all there is to it. Now let me just say, let me deviate just a little bit, and let me just tell you just this, and this is my view. The American family farm has got to be protected like none other. Right today, right now, you know, what we have is the average size of the American family farm is 450, plus or minus, acres. You just think about it. What are they doing right now? What are they doing right now? You know, maybe in Wyoming it may very well be 30 below zero, and they are out on a snowmobile or a horse, trying to feed their cattle. Maybe, if they were a dairyman, you know, or lady, wherever it may be, there is never a day off, never a day off. The cows have to be milked. There is never a day off. Whether it be maybe just that little farm, that is sitting, trying to figure out how in the world, with fertilizer prices or whatever it may be, how in the world can we make ends come out, or ends work. Just think about this. They are probably driving a 12-year- old pickup truck. They are trying every way they possibly can, and every year they are in a Texas Hold 'Em game where they shove everything all in, every single year. Ms. Rollins. That is right. Senator Justice. Now, with all that being said, just think about it. What happens if we lose our American small farm? Where do we go? You know, corporate interests, and on and on and on. They are a productive engine like you cannot imagine on the planet. You can never imagine their productivity. They are a treasure to every single last one of us, and we best better protect them and keep them on that farm. You know, they can cash out today with their land, most all, and have a lifestyle that is so much better than their earnings every single year. Why do they do it? They do it because of one thing--they love what they do. They are the best of the best, and they love what they do, and we have got to keep them there, and we have got to protect them, in every single way. I know it, in my heart, and I believe it, with all my soul. You know, if you will just step back and look, the grocery stores, a mile long, food beyond belief. Now I know we have had an increase in food prices and we need to do something about that if we possibly can. We enjoy a luxury that is off the chart. What we throw away, many, many around the world would beg to have what we throw away. It is a luxury beyond belief, and that small farm that I am talking about provides us that luxury. Brooke, I have really only got one question for you, and it is just this. I do not have enough time to go into all the specifics. From a value-added standpoint, you know, if I could deviate just a second to forestry, and I look forward to telling you about this because I have got a plan that really could very well help bring our furniture manufacturing, our cabinetry, you know, our flooring manufacturing back from it being in China, Vietnam, and Mexico, where we have lost it all, for all practical purposes, back to us. We will talk about that. I want to hear that you are really supportive of value- added products, because it is so important to getting our manufacturing at home, and what President Trump absolutely believes and wants more than anything. Again, I am all in with your nomination, 1000 percent. You will do an amazing job. There is no question about it. Please comment in the value- added, please. Ms. Rollins. Sir, there is no excuse why everything in American agriculture, and America in general, but we are here to talk about ag, is not the best of the world, that everything that we work on is of the most excellent approach, and that we continue to build and feed and thrive and preserve the American heritage of the greatest farmers in the world. Senator Justice. I am telling you, and everybody should pay close attention, she is a superstar. Ms. Rollins. Thank you, sir. Senator Justice. We need her. We need her. Ms. Rollins. Thank you, sir. I am humbled. Senator Justice. It is premature, but congratulations. Ms. Rollins. As long as I have Babydog's support, that is-- -- Senator Justice. Oh, you have got Babydog with you every single day. Ms. Rollins. Thank you, sir. I so appreciate that. Thank you. Senator Justice. Thank you. Chairman Boozman. Babydog was the difference in you getting on the Committee or not.  Senator Justice. Babydog trumps me every single day. Chairman Boozman. Senator Warnock. Senator Warnock. I do not know how to follow that. Welcome to the Committee. Senator Justice. Thank you, sir. Senator Warnock. Thank you, Chairman Boozman. I want to take a moment to congratulate you and Ranking Member Klobuchar on your appointments to lead this Committee. I look forward to working with both of you. I have met with each of you, and I have enjoyed our relationship and the work that we have tried to do and the work we have done. Ms. Rollins, good morning---- Ms. Rollins. Good morning. Senator Warnock . and welcome to you and also to your family and all those who are here to support you, and congratulations on your nomination. Ms. Rollins. Thank you. Senator Warnock. I enjoyed also meeting with you last month to discuss your nomination and plans for USDA. This morning I would just like to follow-up on some of the issues, many of which we have already discussed. First, it has come to my attention that a recent executive order has led to the potential termination of USDA's liaisons to our 1890 Land Grant Institutions, institutions like Fort Valley State University in Fort Valley, Georgia. There is strong bipartisan support for these institutions. They have done an incredible job, often doing so much for so many, with so very little, for such a long time, that people--it is lost on people that work at these institutions every day. I am deeply concerned about this and the actions to shut out their voices at USDA. Ms. Rollins, if you are confirmed, will you commit to supporting our 1890 Institutions? Ms. Rollins. Sir, I believe Prairieview A&M is one of those 1890 Institutions, which I am very familiar with, and partnered as a student at Texas A&M and in the last administration worked with. I am not familiar with exactly what you are speaking of, but my commitment to you is to find out and to continue a really important discussion and to learn more about the issue. Senator Warnock. Well, the executive order could lead to the potential termination of USDA's liaisons to these 1890 Institutions, which help them to navigate their relationship with the USDA. Can I have your commitment to protect those who serve these institutions at the USDA? Ms. Rollins. Again, sir, I would want to know more and understand more before I can make that commitment, but clearly those institutions are important, they are bipartisan supported, and you have my commitment to have a very robust dialog at any moment, any time of day or night, to ensure that we have all the data as we are making any decisions. Senator Warnock. I appreciate that. I have good relationships and good work, bipartisan work, supporting these institutions, and I hope you will---- Ms. Rollins. Yes, sir. Senator Warnock . keep your eye on that issue. Ms. Rollins. I will. Senator Warnock. Last year I worked hard with my colleagues in a bipartisan manner to provide $21 billion to help farmers recover from natural disasters like Hurricane Helene. Farmers, as you know, do incredible work. It is a tough business. There is so much you do not control. The margins are narrow. I do everything I can to protect my growers in Georgia. I cannot overstate how critical it is for USDA to distribute this assistance, this disaster assistance, to Georgia farmers as quickly as possible, but also as equitably as possible. If confirmed, briefly because I want to get through these questions, how will you work to ensure disaster assistance is distributed both swiftly and equitably? Ms. Rollins. Yes, sir, thank you, and I will try to answer quickly so we can go on. The day I got the call from President Trump, it was Saturday, November 23d. We were in our motor home, traveling across the country to an Aggie football game. Within a few hours of accepting the nomination I began to immediately pivot to how do we distribute this disaster, and so important, economic aid, working with a few of the Senators on this Committee. Clearly I am not confirmed yet so this is going to await my arrival. In the meantime, sir, we have already announced the Under Secretary who worked on this in the last Trump administration, who is already building the team who distributed these funds, so they know what they are doing. We are not reinventing the wheel. Senator Warnock. Well, will you work with our state agriculture commissioner to ensure Georgia producers, including our foresters, have the support they need from USDA to get that assistance without having to jump through a bunch of bureaucratic hoops? Ms. Rollins. Of course. Senator Warnock. Will you also commit to equitably getting that assistance to all eligible farmers, all eligible farmers, including those who have been historically left out of USDA assistance, often due to discrimination? Ms. Rollins. Sir, we will follow the law and ensure that that is the case. Senator Warnock. Is that a yes or a no? Ms. Rollins. Yes. Senator Warnock. Let me move on to the next subject. Thanks so much. Fighting hunger has long been a part of my life's work, long before I was elected to the Senate. As you know, I am a pastor, and the one miracle story that is in all the Gospels, all four, is the feeding of the 5,000. Ms. Rollins. That is right. Senator Warnock. I constantly hear from Georgia families about how their dollar just does not go as far at the grocery store as it used to. The average Georgian participating in SNAP, a food assistance program that provides critical nutrition aid to our most vulnerable families, has about $6.15 a day to spend on food. In your view, is $6.15 a day adequate to avoid hunger for Georgia families? Ms. Rollins. Sir, this is a supplemental program. I am just getting my arms around it. There is few that will be in my role, if confirmed, that have a passion for this more than I do. Serving those who are most in need, as you and I discussed in your office, is a driving force of my entire life. It almost sent me to seminary, but I ended up in public policy instead. You have my wholehearted commitment to look and ensure that the people who need this most are receiving it in the best way possible, but at the same time, ensuring that all of the tax dollars that are spent on it are also spent in the best way possible. Senator Warnock. One of the things, as these families struggle, one of the things that I am concerned about are proposals to slash this critical assistance and create additional work verification red tape for families participating in these programs. Do you think creating more bureaucratic red tape for families will help them purchase nutritious food? Ms. Rollins. I think it is extremely important that we take a wholesale look at every one of these programs and ensure that they are serving the people that are needing the programs and that they are the safety net they are truly set out to be. Obviously, I do not like the words ``bureaucracy'' or ``red tape,'' but ensuring that we have set up the appropriate lifelines and the appropriate structure so that we can get these resources to the families that need them the most. Senator Warnock. As we talk about work requirements, and I support work. I was raised by a father and a mother, commitment, we had a serious work ethic. We want to help these families have a basic safety net. Most poor people are children. I think it is important to remember that. Most poor people are children. SNAP lifts children, seniors, veterans, and folks with disabilities out of poverty, and it is proven to reduce health care costs and stimulate our local economies. If you are confirmed I hope we can find ways to work together to ensure our most vulnerable families and our neighbors can afford groceries. I think, as someone again who preaches the miracle of the feeding of the 5,000, I think it is the right thing to do, but I also think it is the smart thing to do. Ms. Rollins. Yes, sir. You have my commitment, and my friend, Dr. Alveda King, is here, and we have spoken of that multiples of times. Looking forward to working with everyone on that. Senator Warnock. I am her family's pastor. Ms. Rollins. Yes, sir. I am very well aware. Thank you. Chairman Boozman. Senator Grassley. Senator Grassley. Congratulations. Like other Senators I think you will do a good job. Ms. Rollins. Thank you, sir. Senator Grassley. I want to start out by thanking you, like Senator Durbin did, for, during the Trump administration working with us on the First Step Act. You were actively involved in a lot of those negotiations between Democrats and Republicans on the Hill here, as well as between us and the first Trump administration. You worked hard. I noticed after you took the oath the first question you got was, ``Are you going to answer our letters?'' Remember what I told you in my office? Ms. Rollins. Oh yes, sir. Senator Grassley. As I tell every confirmed person coming to my office, that you ought to say maybe. Because I pointed out to you how I had 158 letters to the Justice Department that are still unanswered. Ms. Rollins. Yes, sir. Senator Grassley. They said yes, but they turned out to be liars, and that is true of Republican and Democrat administration, generally. I hope since you said ``I do,'' you will tell all your colleagues in the Cabinet the same darn thing, or they are going to be liars. Ms. Rollins. Yes, sir. I hear you loud and clear, and I have to believe with 100,000 employees at USDA we will be able to answer your letters, to the best of my ability, sir. Yes. Senator Grassley. Okay. Now, at least one other person, my colleague, Senator Ernst, has brought up the importance of whistleblowers and information she got from them. I am not sure that I want to ask you a question. I just want to tell you what is on my mind, and that is you have got tens of thousands of people working under you. You cannot know what they do. You ought to listen to whistleblowers. It is not you, yourself, listening to whistleblowers. It is you establishing a culture within your agency that middle management is going to listen to whistleblowers, because then they do not have to come and bother me. I have got 38 different investigations going. Most of it has come from whistleblower information about fraud or about the law not being followed or misspending of money, and all that. Listen to whistleblowers, will you? Ms. Rollins. Yes, sir. You have my 100 percent commitment. We talked about it in your office, and I really look forward to that. Senator Grassley. The next thing is the legal term, ``actively engaged'' in farming is not enforced. We have got too many people on Wall Street getting farm payments, that should not be getting them. I want to make sure that all of this manipulation that has gone on in the Department of Agriculture under both Republicans and Democrats to dilute the term ``actively engaged''--and I am being a little facetious when I say this, but you ought to at least have dirt under your fingernails if you are going to get payments from the taxpayers for your farming operation. I expect ``actively engaged'' to be fully enforced by you, and whatever, however it has been diluted you ought to take a look at it and make sure that it is stiffer than what it otherwise was. Then when we get into this negotiations on a 5-year farm bill--I do not expect you to answer this now, but just let me tell you, there can be tremendous savings to the taxpayers, and you can even discuss this with Mr. Musk of DOGE, and you can discuss it with people at OMB. If you can put a cap on what one farmer can get from the farm program, so we are not subsidizing big farmers. They get bigger, and I have got nothing wrong with the marketplace working for people to get as big as they want to get. We should be subsidizing. The whole point of an agricultural 5-year farm bill safety net is to protect people that are medium-and small-sized farmers that cannot control what happens to them, whether it is a natural disaster or a Carter grain embargo, or some war in Kyiv. Big farmers can handle that, but small farmers cannot. That seems to me, for the same reason we put out disaster relief for farmers in the bill that just passed before Christmas, and you are going to administer, there is the same reason that we have a safety net for farmers on prices generally and things beyond their control. I try every farm bill to get this done, and the most successful farm bill I had, and I hope I am successful in this farm bill, was 2015, when I got a cap put on in both the House and Senate in exactly the same language, and it should not have been diluted at all, or changed at all, when it goes to conference, because those are the rules of the conference. The Congressman from Texas--I do not know his name--that was Chairman of the Ag Committee at that time--and you probably know who he was--he did not like it and he diluted it until it was practically meaningless at this point. If you want to save some taxpayers money, look at that issue when I bring it up again. Ms. Rollins. Thank you, sir. Senator Grassley. Another thing is we had the first Trump administration, we had a couple of times in the Biden administration used money from the Commodity Credit Corporation that I do not think should have been used. The power of the purse, as you know, rests with Congress, under Article I of the Constitution, and money cannot be spent without authority of Congress. Billions have been wasted that way, and I hope you do not get involved in wasting those dollars again. I will end with the Packers and Stockyards Act. I think it is stronger than anything that the Justice Department can do under antitrust laws to protect the welfare of the farmer to make sure that the marketplace is working. Thank God, Vilsack, just before he left office, put out some regulations that will help enforce powers of Packers and Stockyards Act, particularly to protect livestock producers and highly concentrated areas of agriculture or the Poultry Grower Payment System, the Capital Improvement Payment System. The American Farm Bureau Federation has spoken positively about these issues. I think there were some more that are on the book that maybe you can take a look at that he did not get around to putting out, because maybe they are a little more controversial. The Packers and Stockyards Act is the most effective tool to make sure that the marketplace works for the American farmer. Thank you. Ms. Rollins. Thank you, Senator, and I am really looking forward to working with you and continuing to move forward, and especially focusing on our small family farms and rural America. Chairman Boozman. Senator Slotkin. Senator Slotkin. Thank you. Congratulations, Mr. Chairman and Madam Ranking Chairwoman. I am honored to be here as the successor of Debbie Stabenow, our esteemed former Chairwoman, the queen of Michigan agriculture. We miss her, and I have really, really big shoes to fill there. Thank you for our conversation in my office. I appreciate your positive approach to meeting with everybody. I have the honor to live on my family farm, which used to be beef cattle, is now soy and corn, alternatively. I am also a former CIA officer, Pentagon official. I really come to the Ag Committee with a sense that food security is national security, and the United States should always be able to feed itself by itself, and everything flows from there. If people agree then there are a lot of policies that become pretty clear, of the sale of our land to foreign governments or to private equity, all of those things. I think that is the approach that I tend to take. I am also from Michigan. We are not Kansas. We are not Iowa. We are specialty crops, right. We have the second most diverse agricultural sector in the country, after California, and we take pride in not doing monocropping and doing a lot of fruits and vegetables and a lot of other things. This is why I am particularly concerned about the tariffs. Everyone is talking about tariffs. Mr. Trump is throwing them around, and I just want to review the bidding to make sure, particularly with your agency, that we are all on the same page on what happened the last time President Trump put on tariffs, what happened specifically to our farmers. Just to review the bidding, President Trump announced 25 percent tariffs on Chinese products--batteries, TVs, medical devices. Again, I certainly understand the instinct, as a CIA officer, right. I want to push back on China. China retaliated and put 25 percent tariffs on soybeans, fruits, pork, and some other items. Then we got into a trade war. We started adding more things to the list. They started adding more things to the list. It went on and on and on, and back and forth. Suddenly, our farmers across the country are screaming bloody murder because the markets that they used to have access to, no one wanted to buy our stuff because it had that 25 percent tariff. We felt that very acutely. What did we do? Because we felt, under the Trump administration, people rightfully felt like our farmers were getting the shaft here, they raided the CCC account, the emergency rainy day account that you will have control over, for $23 billion, to give subsidies to our farmers. We put on the tariff, got into a trade war, ended up our farmers were in trouble, we paid them off. Everyone here has said no farmer wants a subsidy. They want to work, right. They want to get paid a fair rate for their crop. That emergency fund is the same fund that helps us with things like avian flu, that we are now dealing with all over the country. You can imagine, as a Michigander, the throwing around of tariffs, particularly with Canada, Mexico, a bunch of other places. I am trepidatious that this is going to come back to our farmers. When you get confirmed, and it looks like you will, you will swear an oath to the Constitution of the United States, not to President Trump. Can you say--I know you have said it--but for the Michiganders watching, that you will throw your body in front of the bus to make sure that any political talking point on tariffs that may sound good is actually truly tested against how it will impact our farmers, like it was not last time around? Ms. Rollins. Senator, I appreciate your passion, I share it, and I think we are similar in a lot of ways. Yes, my commitment is that there will be no sleeping, that we will work around the clock to ensure that our ag communities across this country are represented in those discussions and at the table. I will do everything in my power to elevate, preserve, honor, conserve that backbone of America. Senator Slotkin. Yes. I just want to know that you have a good relationship with President Trump, and that is a value add. Use it to help our farmers, not just a political talking point. We all want to punch back on China, most of us, but it has got to fit reality here and not end up boomeranging on us like it did last time. Next is avian flu. We talked about this, as well, in my office. Michigan has been dealing with this. Lots of states around the country are dealing with it. We have had human beings, a few, getting ill. One passed away. We now see it in cats, household pets that are eating birds that have it, that kind of thing. What we have seen, you know, I think Michigan has gotten decently high marks for handling it well because we have cooperated with the Federal Government. There are a lot of folks around the country that are not so friendly with the Federal Government. You are going to be the Federal Government, having to put some muscle behind some of our rules so that we do not see this spread. I mean, again, right now you cannot get a dozen eggs around Holly, Michigan, where I live, for less than $4.69 a dozen. It used to be two bucks. Please tell me what you are going to do in the Federal Government role that you are about to take to make sure that we stem the spread of avian flu, even the states and farmers who are not so friendly with the Federal Government. Ms. Rollins. Thank you, Senator, and I do remember our conversation, and it is certainly a top priority. I know in my opening remarks it is one of my top four priorities on day one, putting the right team in place to ensure that what you discussed and outlined is happening. I do believe that with my depth of experience with working at all levels of government, specifically at the state level, I have been working closely--I believe probably mostly Republican, maybe all Republican, but all the ag commissioners, I am already in contact with, and if confirmed will continue to work closely with them. I think there is no doubt that the all-of-government approach, working with the stakeholder community but also the state and local officials, is going to be extremely important. To your point about food security at the top of your remarks, that remains paramount, I think, for all of us. Senator Slotkin. Yes. Then, last, I will just echo some of Senator Warnock's comments. We have seen, in versions of the farm bill that were created in the past year, both in the House and the Senate, that SNAP is usually the bill payer for at least part of it, and cuts to SNAP, and then additional subsidies to some of our farmers, frankly particularly farmers down South. I understand that that is popular. I would just ask you again to look into your heart. If the majority of poor people are children, that is not a work requirement that they can meet. Please just remember the children and be thoughtful about our approach on SNAP, not just, again, a political talking point. Ms. Rollins. I will, Senator. Thank you. Senator Slotkin. Thank you. I yield back. Chairman Boozman. Senator Fischer. Senator Fischer. Thank you, Senator Boozman, and congratulations on your gavel. I look forward to working with you and with the Ranking Member. Thank you. Ms. Rollins, so good to see you. I really, really appreciated you coming to the office last month and the great discussion that we had. As you know, the agricultural industry is the economic engine of Nebraska. We grow a lot of corn and beans and wheat and sugar beets and livestock. We span the necessity of having that strong economy for our state, that food security, how important it is for our country, and I look forward to working with you in the future on that. Ms. Rollins. Thank you. Senator Fischer. You noted in your testimony that we must demand strong and steady markets for our agricultural bounty, and this is a statement that I hear consistently from our producers, as well. One of those really important markets for Nebraska's agriculture is biofuels. In his day one actions, President Trump emphasized the need for our country to be energy dominant. The President has long recognized that ag producers have a role to play in producing abundant, home-grown energy, and he took steps in his executive order declaring a national energy emergency so that we can continue to allow for the sale of E15 year-round. I have long led an effort to make this policy permanent, and I look forward to working with my colleagues to deliver on that part of the President's agenda. We know that there is going to be a number of other biofuel decisions that will be made in the coming months that will have significant impacts on the biofuel market. I know you have heard from a number of my colleagues on this Committee about the importance of that. Can you just speak briefly about how you view the importance of biofuel markets for our farmers? Ms. Rollins. I will, and Senator, thank you. I loved being in your office and meeting Fred Fischer, and really look forward to hopefully having more conversations in your office and in your home State of Nebraska, which is one of the shining stars of our country. In the last few months, since the announcement was made that I was going to be hopefully, if confirmed, joining this Administration and the Cabinet as the head of USDA, I have had multiples of conversations with many of you on the Committee and outside the Committee. Your Governor flew to Texas to give me a couple of hours of his time, to make sure I understood, specifically within your state, but frankly, how this affects so much of the Midwest and our corn states. My commitment is to defend and protect and fight for all of American agriculture. Clearly, in the last administration, this issue was under the National Economic Council, Larry Kudlow, so I did not manage it under the Domestic Policy Council, but I was certainly in a lot of the meetings, which there were a lot of meetings, President Trump would tell you, in the Oval Office, about this. His executive order in the last few days mentioning biofuels as part of his all-of-the-above strategy to reclaim energy dominance across the world is important. Senator Fischer. Right. President Trump was very generous with his time in his previous time in the Oval Office, and he is correct. We had a lot of meetings in the Oval Office. Ms. Rollins. I think he said 27. Senator Fischer. Truly. He would like to get this issue settled, as well. I thought maybe in the CR, but we will continue to push for that. What we have seen over the last four years, and what I have heard, has been a lot of disappointment from Nebraskans about the lack of any kind of trade agenda from the Biden administration. In fact, for the first time in decades we have an agricultural trade deficit, and as you said earlier, it is projected to hit a record-breaking $45 billion. I understand there can be a variety of factors that impact a trade deficit, but I am concerned that part of this stems from there being really any kind of clear agricultural trade agenda from the last administration. We cannot see that happen again. Can you talk about how you would both hold our current trading partners accountable and the role that you will, or that you would want to see USDA play in developing these new export markets? Ms. Rollins. Yes, Senator, and that $45 billion, what is remarkable about that is 42 percent of that is just in the last year. Senator Fischer. Yes. Ms. Rollins. The wheels are falling off, and it is very, very important that the wheels get put back on as soon as possible. I think for those that know me for a long time, but even, Senator, you and I have just gotten to know each other in the recent months, know that I am a relentless cheerleader for whatever it is that I have been called to do. For this moment in my life, and to meet this moment, as scripture says, I am called to take agriculture to preserve our rural communities, and take our products to the world, and work around the clock to ensure that that sort of trade deficit begins to peel back, and hopefully by the end of our time here, in the next four years, is completely gone, and, in fact, we are back in the positive. I believe we can do that. I mentioned earlier I think President Trump is the consummate deal maker. His heart for rural America and for our farmers and ranchers I think will hopefully lead the way. I certainly will be right next to him, whispering in his ear as we move forward on this. I think and hope and pray that we can begin to solve for this immediately. Senator Fischer. Great. Another area that I focused on is how precision ag technology can help our farmers and ranchers to achieve better yields and reduce environmental impact, improve economic returns. I have had a number of bills on that that I am going to be reintroducing and including, hopefully, in the farm bill that we work on. Additionally, myself and really the entire Nebraska delegation, along with the University of Nebraska at Lincoln, have been working in a very close partnership with the Ag Research Service on the National Center for Resilience and Regenerative Precision Ag at the University Innovation Campus. Last May we broke ground on that facility, and I hope that I can continue to work with you to make sure that we get that facility completed. Can I get your commitment to continue working with me on this facility? Can I get your commitment to come to Nebraska? We had Sonny Perdue out at the ranch and had a great barbecue, with neighbors. We can do that, and on another trip we can get you to Lincoln and see the ARS facility, what we are doing there. Ms. Rollins. That would be my great honor. Senator Fischer. Great. Thank you. Ms. Rollins. Thank you, Senator. Chairman Boozman. Senator Lujan. Senator Lujan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Representative, welcome to the Committee, Representative Kerwin. I know that most folks have been recognizing you, but we just want to say welcome. I look forward to working with you in whatever capacity we can. My late father also served in the New Mexico legislature, and very much appreciated some of those good projects that he had with some of the new family, if you will, the extended family of members from Texas. I got to know the young person. Welcome to the Committee. Mrs. Rollins, thank you for being here. I very much appreciated the conversation that we had in the office, as well. One of the areas I shared in our conversation is something that I hold deeply, as I expressed to you, which is that every American should be able to have food on their table. No one should go hungry in America, no matter what zip code or area code they live in, or no matter how much money they make. I appreciated my colleagues raising issues in some of these areas with nutritional programs. Given the important role that the Secretary of Agriculture plays in administering federal nutritional programs, I would like to better understand your vision for that. Now, I did my due diligence to go through the America First Policy Institute's documents, but I was not able to find anything that I could digest--which is probably the wrong word to use---- Ms. Rollins. No pun intended. Senator Lujan . when it comes to addressing hunger in America. Do you agree that in America that--let me ask it this way. Do you believe that in an America that is truly great that our children do not go hungry? Ms. Rollins. Yes. Senator Lujan. Updates to the Thrifty Food Plan in 2021, a program that you would have a lot of say over, lifted about 2.4 million SNAP participants, including 1 million children, out of poverty. That is good. It is not great yet because we have not done it all, but it is a good start. Ms. Rollins, yes or no, will you commit to opposing any cuts to SNAP that would prevent Americans, including millions of children, from putting food on their table? Ms. Rollins. Senator, probably not surprising to you, I cannot commit to that. Obviously, it is of utmost importance to me, and you and I discussed that, that we solve this, that it is not just hunger, it is nutrition, as well, for so many of our children that do not have access to those programs. I also know that I have a duty to the taxpayer who is funding, in significant numbers, those programs. I sincerely believe, Senator, that working together and working with other Members of this Committee, it is important to Chairman Boozman, as well, that we can find a solution that may or may not end up in cuts. I do not know. That is something I need to spend more time on, research the data, meet with more people. I cannot make that commitment to you today but I can make the commitment to you for a lot of time, a lot of thought, a lot of conversation as we move down that road. Senator Lujan. I appreciate that. You know, I am always reminded that budgets are a reflection of values, depending on how those budgets are put forth, as well. I certainly hope that in America, while we all have a responsibility, a fiscal responsibility, that our priorities would say children should not go hungry in America. I hope that is something that we can find some commonality on down the road. I want to drill into something more specific, which is a program called WIC. It is a program for women, infants, and children, also a food program. It is one of those acronym programs you talked about that are over at the Department of Agriculture. For decades, Republicans and Democrats have supported full funding for this program, meaning that no eligible mother or child who applies for the program is turned away. In your capacity as Secretary, is this a program that we can count on your support with? Ms. Rollins. I look forward--I believe that is one of the 16 nutrition programs across the United States Department of Agriculture purview. I have not spent as much time as I hope to in the coming days and weeks, once confirmed, to really dig into that. Clearly my heart, this Administration, I believe speaking for the full Administration, clearly America is the place where everyone should have the opportunity to be in part of a safety net when needed, and WIC, I realize, is an important part of that safety net. Senator Lujan. I appreciate that response very much. Now in the area of specialty crops, everyone here brags on whose is best. We have it. Ms. Rollins. It is New Mexico. Senator Lujan. I am going to address that right away. I share the concern that many have shared up here today around small farms. Fifty-three percent of New Mexico farms are 50 acres or less. The one that I am on is under five. I am concerned, as well, with what has been happening with small farms across America, whether it is water rights that are being gobbled up and taken off for something else, away from agricultural water rights, or who is buying them, or what they are turning into. It is one of the reasons I introduced a piece of legislation with Senator Moran, that is the Farmer to Farmer Education Act. I will never forget a conversation I had with a grower back home, where I was asking him about USDA programs years back, and he said, ``Well, we don't do so well qualifying for those programs and all the rest.'' I said, ``Well, you are doing okay. You are doing better than most. Tell me how.'' He said, ``I had to learn now to farm USDA.'' Maybe that works for some but not for all. I agree with everyone that has talked about the red tape that exists for some of these programs. We have got to find a better way. These are people that are spending time producing food, growing food. They should not be stuck behind a desk trying to figure out what document needs to go here or what document needs to go there. We have got to find a better way. I appreciate your commitment already in that particular area, and your commitment to work with small farms. The other area I raised in our meeting, and I actually just got off the phone with someone, so I apologize for excusing myself, but the Hermit's Peak/Calf Canyon fire. This is a fire that started a few years ago that became the largest fire in the State of New Mexico's history. What surprises a lot of folks, and I appreciate my Republican and Democratic colleagues for supporting me and helping me create a fund specifically for this fire, is that this fire started as a prescribed burn. My brother actually called in to try to burn our ditches and some things around our house, and you have to call the local fire department, is the way our permit works. You call them up and you say, ``Can I burn today?'' They will tell you, ``Nope. No burning today.'' He got a no burn the day that they started this prescribed burn. It got out of control. Then I got told by folks around USDA, ``Well, very few percentage of our fires, prescribed fires, turn into big burns.'' About two months later, guess what happened in New Mexico? We had another one. There was an investigation, and then that investigation showed that rather than using the infrared technology that we have all helped fund, some folks put their hands on the deal, and it did not feel warm, and they walked away, and the winds kicked up. We know what happens when a little coal gets a little bit of a breeze. Sometimes we do it ourselves, give it a little breath. There has got to be a better way about ensuring that the technology we can secure, that firefighters get paid properly, but that we follow this so this does not happen anywhere in America again. I will close with this, Mr. Chairman. I very much appreciate, Mrs. Rollins, your commitment to working with Governor Noem or with FEMA, and making sure that when these programs exist, that money gets out the door to the families that need it most. Just thank you for that. Good luck with everything. Again, Representative, I am honored to have you here today. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Rollins. Thank you, Senator. Chairman Boozman. Senator Moran. Senator Moran. Mr. Chairman, I would defer to the Senator from South Dakota as the Majority Leader. Otherwise, I will feel too much pressure to be brief. Chairman Boozman. Well, they told me that the Majority Leader was here, and it is customary that he goes. He was trying to show his servant leadership and let you go. Senator Moran. Well, I was trying to do the same thing, and I defer and yield to the Senator from South Dakota. Chairman Boozman. Okay. Senator Thune. Again, I think it is a real tribute. Senator Thune right now is a busy person, trying to get the railroad going here and doing a lot of different things. It just shows how important agriculture is, not only to him but to his state. Senator Thune. Moran is just trying to get one up on me. You know. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Ms. Rollins, for your willingness to serve. This issue is incredibly important, as you already know, to folks on this Committee. It is the number one industry in our State of South Dakota. We know you are going to be great in this job, and we look forward to moving you along and getting you confirmed and off to work. There are several things that need to be worked on. We have a record trade deficit in agriculture, which we have never seen that before. It has been one area of our economy that we have always had trade surpluses. The Emergency Relief Program has not worked well. There have been a lot of glitches that need to be smoothed out. We want you to jump on that one, as well. I would say among the issues that I want to touch on quickly, and you have been here forever, and I will try and keep this brief, although my colleague from Kansas can ask questions. I want to touch on a couple of things that are really in my home state. As you know, I have been a long-time supporter of mandatory country of origin labeling for beef products. I would just say that South Dakota cattle producers work really, really hard, and tirelessly, to produce some of the highest quality beef in the world. The system in which producers operate needs to be fair and transparent, which I think is critical that we take the steps to pass legislation tasking USDA and USTR to find a path forward on mandatory country of origin labeling. If confirmed, will you commit to working closely with my office, as well as with the U.S. trade rep to ensure a WTO-compliant path forward for mandatory country of origin labeling? Ms. Rollins. Yes, sir. I look forward to that, and hopefully I can be a value-add and a consensus-driven approach to that. I really appreciate your leadership and passion for this. Senator Thune. Thank you. I appreciate that very much. We will look forward to that. As you know, the Black Hills is an important timber producer, and timber processors and communities depend upon the Forest Service for nearly 80 percent of their raw material, and in turn, the Forest Service depends on the capacity of the processors to care for and manage the forests. I know this has been touched on already, but I want to talk specifically about the Black Hills. Since 2019, the Timber Sale Program in the Black Hills Forest has been cut drastically. In fact, sales announced for this fiscal year are approximately 25 percent of what is allowed for in the current forest plan. In 2021, one of the three primary sawmills in the Black Hills closed, citing a lack of U.S. Forest Service timber sales as the primary factor, and today the remaining sawmills are operating at 50 percent, incurring financial losses, and trucking in material from other states. This is not sustainable. The Biden administration policies have decimated the timber industry, forest products industry in the Black Hills of South Dakota. It is not sustainable for companies, communities, or, frankly, for that matter, for the national forests. We have got to manage our forests in a way that reduces the wildfire risk that exists out there. We are starting to see evidence of another pine beetle epidemic in the Black Hills. I guess my question is, if confirmed, will you commit to work with us quickly, and the entire delegation of the Black Hills National Forest footprint, and the forest products industry to understand the issues at hand and to get much needed attention and priority, and hopefully relief, to what is a very dire situation in the Black Hills National Forest? Ms. Rollins. Yes, sir, I have become acutely aware that not just in your home state but in multiples of home states this industry is just being decimated by current policies. I believe I speak for the larger administration and President Trump that that is unacceptable. Whatever we need to do, within reason and within the law, to turn the ship on that, you have my full commitment and as much time as I can possibly give, building the best team, getting our Under Secretary in this arena confirmed as soon as possible. We have already begun the path forward on that, and I really look forward to working with you ongoing and hopefully moving very quickly. Senator Thune. Thank you. We will work quickly to get you confirmed and hopefully the people who will have direct responsibility for this. It is that urgent. I mean, this is an emergency. I cannot tell you. People in the Black Hills and the jobs that go with it are really desperate. All right. Finally, on just the beginning farmers, it is challenging, I think as you know, because of some of the barriers to entry to get into agriculture. Making that easier, not harder, and less expensive, not more expensive, is something that we have really focused on. I have got a bill with Senator Klobuchar, which we can talk to you later about. Crop insurance has always been the foundation, the cornerstone of the safety net, and we have got other programs that we try to refine each time we do a farm bill. This farm bill, which the Chairman will lead us through, will be my fifth. As we do that, I would encourage you to work with us to find ways to strengthen and fortify the existing safety net programs and look at ways that we can provide incentives and encourage beginning farmers and young people who desire and aspire to become involved in production agriculture, to be able to do so. Ms. Rollins. Sir, thank you for that. The average age of the farmer in America is 58 years old. That is not sustainable. If we hope to revivify and restore our rural communities and go back to our family farms, we have to address this immediately. Whatever that looks like, whatever all of the wholesale approach could be or should be, I will be the biggest advocate, the biggest cheerleader. I will be in the White House all the time talking about it, all across America, working with all of you to fix that. I think it is of dire importance for the future of our country. Senator Thune. Great. Thank you, Ms. Rollins, and thank you again for your willingness to serve. Mr. Chairman, thank you. Ms. Rollins. Thank you so much, Senator. Chairman Boozman. Well, we are still on the first round. Senator Schiff has already gone, so Senator Moran. Senator Moran. Chairman, thank you, and Senator Thune, thank you. I am pleased to be a new Member of the Senate Agriculture Committee, and it took a waiver that probably involved the Majority Leader's approval, so I am pleased to now have that debt clear. Ms. Rollins. You are all free. Senator Moran. I am all free. Ms. Rollins, thank you very much for the conversation we had in the office. Thank you for your interest in serving. I want to run through, I hope, maybe five things that I want to talk about briefly, some of which we did talk in person. First of all, it has been described here the dangerous and dramatic circumstances that farmers and ranchers find themselves in across the country. It is certainly true in Kansas. We have the same difficulties that everybody else has across the country with high input costs and low commodity prices. I would add that almost 80 percent of the counties in Kansas are in a drought circumstance. You add to the problems that we cannot grow a crop is dramatic. This is the least amount of wheat harvested in Kansas since 1961. There are significant challenges. It highlights what Senator Thune said about the importance of a risk management program, crop insurance, and it is, perhaps, as important as anything else that we will do. Our failure to pass a farm bill, and one of the reasons that I am excited to be on the Senate Agriculture Committee is this really does have to be our shot at getting the farm bill done. I cannot imagine there can be another excuse, and we will have an administration that is cheering us on. Senator Boozman and Senator Klobuchar are two people, I think, that we will see work together, and I pledge to do my part to accomplish that. As a result of no farm bill and all these other problems, we passed disaster assistance, economic and natural disaster, I just want to again remind you the timeliness. Our farmers are going to their bankers, have been to their bankers. There is not time for a farmer to have to wait to see what the consequences were. If we could predict, if USDA could tell farmers how the program is going to be administered, even before the checks are determined, that would be very valuable if they put it into their planning process, helpful to them and helpful to their banker. I would remind you that in my view, and I think my colleagues, certainly my farmers at home, the way that disaster assistance was implemented in 2022, did not help the farmers who suffered the greatest losses. The way that your predecessor implemented the disaster payments was very damaging, very discouraging, very disappointing. We would ask you to do so, to implement as the payments were determined in the 2018-2019 crop years, USDA disbursed the way--and in addition to asking that question, you would also be complying with congressional law and intent. We worked hard to make clear that whoever the Secretary of Agriculture was, in whatever administration, they could not go back and do it the way that provided almost, very little disaster assistance. That is number one, and if you happen to tell me yes---- Ms. Rollins. Yes, and since we have Senator Thune still here, the quicker we can get our Under Secretary approved in that lane, the quicker we will be able to move. Obviously, my confirmation, as well, if approved, and I will be honored. We have already begun putting the team together that did this work under President Trump's first administration. Hopefully, my thought was that we will not have to reinvent the wheel. We can immediately begin moving. That is my commitment, and again, I will work all hours to ensure that that happens. Senator Moran. Thank you for that answer. I also want to, again, highlight a few words that I mentioned in our conversation in the office. The National Bio and Agro-Defense Facility. Ms. Rollins. Yes, sir. Senator Moran. In Manhattan, Kansas, near Kansas State University is this national center, created as a result of the fear of an introduction of some entity, something into our food supply system that would be a terrorist act, and do we have the capability scientifically to respond. That facility is a $1.5 billion facility. It employs 400 people. It has greater potential than what has been developed between the Department of Homeland Security and the Department of Agriculture. It has been transferred to USDA. It is your responsibility. If could give me a point person, now or a few days from now, which could become my point person on the National Bio Agroscience Facility. Ms. Rollins. Yes, sir. I cannot do it right at this moment, but I will absolutely get that to you as soon as I have the ability to do that. I do not know if I have to wait to be confirmed. If I do not, you will get that right away. If I do, hopefully that will come upon confirmation very soon. Senator Moran. It seems to me that we should be working for your fast confirmation. Ms. Rollins. That seems like a really good idea. Senator Moran. Let me highlight NIFA and ERS. The Trump administration, in the past, decided that they wanted to help put departments, agencies, federal employees across the country, not totally centered here in Washington, DC, the Nation's capital. NIFA and ERS agencies were moved to Kansas City. I think what happened is in the circumstances here in Washington, DC, there were 650 or 700 employees. I am told that there are 400 employees now in Kansas City, but I am also, at least by press reports, only 20 percent of the people are actually working in the office. If we want to have the kind of consequence in reviving rural America other places in the country, this is certainly a Kansas issue but it is a Kansas-Missouri-Nebraska-Iowa, where sometimes our farm kids cannot get a job back on the farm, cannot return to the family farm, but they want to work in agriculture. Or it is a spouse of somebody who is on the farm. Having those agencies and their employees in places like Kansas and Missouri and Iowa and Nebraska creates opportunities that would not otherwise exist. In my view, the purpose of the move was defeated in the reality of telling people, ``Well, you stay in D.C. and work from home.'' That fits in with a conversation a number of us have had about actually getting USDA and other federal employees back in the office. Ms. Rollins. I 100 percent agree with you. I am extremely excited to get our workforce back into the office, whether it is here in Washington or out across the country. I think that in the business that we are in at USDA, a customer business, and being available for our customers, whether that is up in Senator Welch's Vermont or my Texas, wherever it is, your Kansas, that we have people in the office. That will be a very big priority of mine. Senator Moran. Thank you. I am involved in SAF, renewable aviation fuel. We have introduced legislation, Farm to Fly. It has been made a part of the draft of both the House and Senate farm bills. I would just ask for your awareness that there is an opportunity for agriculture across the country as we begin to fuel the aviation industry. In Kansas, the air capital of the world, along with an agricultural center, has a great potential, but this is a potential for all farmers, as we talk about how to make sure if we have lost a market due to a tariff or as they struggle. We need every market we can get. It also requires a good definition from 45Z and the Treasury Department, which you have said you will advocate for. Finally, we have an ARS Research Center in Manhattan, Kansas. Kansas State University has a tremendous amount of agricultural research. We would like to see cooperation between the two, including potentially the colocation of their work. The facilities for ARS are nothing that they should be. There is a lot of work that needs to be done, and there are a number of us, including the Chairman of the Committee, who are Members of the Appropriations Committee for the Department of Agriculture. We want to help you get better facilities, and I would just like to highlight the need for cooperation. If we are going to build better or expand a facility, can we do it in conjunction with the local university and get the bigger bang for the buck. Ms. Rollins. I encourage that discussion. Obviously, it is a proud agriculture degree from Texas A&M, and I am still very close to the leadership there. In fact, our vice chancellor was hoping to be here today, but ended up having to give a speech to some livestock producers. I really look forward. My heart is with a lot of these universities, with all of our land grants across the country. Senator Moran. That was a very fine answer. I like the response. Except there was something you should have said about the importance of other land grant universities, for example, Kansas State University. Ms. Rollins. For example, Kansas State, Senator, yes. I appreciate that, and I am excited to continue that work with you. Senator Moran. Let me tell Mrs. Kerwin, thank you for raising a great daughter. Ms. Rollins. Thank you, sir. Chairman Boozman. Senator Schiff, 5 minutes. We are going to do 5-minute rounds now. Senator Schiff. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Rollins, right now farm workers in Ventura County are picking strawberries in a brown haze, smoke from the fires. It is a surreal scene to look at images of working in those conditions. These are just some of the difficult conditions that farm workers are often in. They are working in 100-degree heat. They are working in the cold. They are some of the hardest-working people I have ever met. I want to raise the issue of the impact that mass deportations would have on them. First and foremost, on people who are working so hard to put food on our table and just the, to me, grave injustice of deporting people who are doing such vital work to feed us, there is also the impact on their families. Many of them have children who are U.S. citizens, and will be U.S. citizens. It would have the effect of splitting up their families. Even if we set that aside, which we should not, it is estimated that perhaps half of California's farm workforce is undocumented. My question is, how are you supposed to farm? How are farmers in California supposed to survive if there are truly mass deportations in which half of the workforce is sent out of the country? Americans do not want to do that work. It is, frankly, just too back-breaking. Who is going to work the farms? Ms. Rollins. Senator, I know we talked about this in your office and had a productive, perhaps agreed to disagree, but still productive conversation, and I so appreciate that. We have talked about this within this Committee in the last three or four hours, as well. President Trump ran and was overwhelmingly elected on the priority of border security and mass deportation. He and his team are, I am assuming, currently putting in place the plans to begin that process, of course first with those who have committed criminal offenses once they have been here. The American people have asked for a secure border and a system where they do not have to be concerned with the millions and millions that crossed here illegally and brought a lot of strife and unsafe communities to America. I know this is not the committee where we discuss this, and I know probably the last thing you want to do is get into a debate right now over it, because I sure do not want to. Let me answer your question. I will work around the clock with our new Labor Secretary, if she is confirmed, Lori Chavez- DeRemer. There is obviously, I think everyone would agree, H- 2A, important changes that need to be made to recognize, within the agriculture community, the importance of a strong labor force. Senator Schiff. Well, I still want to get back to my question, though. If they are gone, who is going to do that work? Ms. Rollins. Well, sir, we do not know, first of all, who ``they'' are, right. I mean, we all throw numbers around, like 40 percent, 50 percent, 60 percent. The answer is we just do not know. As these processes and programs are being implemented under this new Administration, with the full support of the majority of Americans, I think that we, as the leaders in agriculture, myself as the leader at USDA, you on this Committee, along with others on the Committee, that we will work together to understand and hopefully solve for some of these problems, that the dairy cattle have to be milked. If we have got a mass deportation program underway, then there is a lot of work that we need to do, through the Labor Department, with Lori Chavez-DeRemer, who is also an ag person, and working with Congress to solve for a lot of this through our current programs, our current labor programs that are already on the books. Senator Schiff. Let me ask one other related question on this topic, and that is, if we deport a large percentage of our farm workforce, farm labor is going to be scarce. Isn't that inevitably going to push up food prices? If so, isn't that in sharp contrast with what the President said he wanted to do, to bring down egg prices and food prices and everything else? Ms. Rollins. Well, first of all, we are speaking in hypotheticals, but certainly these are hypotheticals we do need to be thinking through, and I think it is a very fair point. The President has made food inflation and the cost of food one of his top priorities. I have worked alongside him. I have been part of his team for many years now. I believe in his vision and his commitment to America and to his promises, and in so doing I believe that we will be able to find, in our toolkit, what we need to do to solve for any hypothetical issues that end up turning out to be real, moving forward, over the coming months and years. Senator Schiff. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I would just say that I hope they are hypothetical. Ms. Rollins. I do too. Senator Schiff. I fear they may be all too real. Ms. Rollins. Thank you, sir. Senator Schiff. Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Chairman Boozman. Thank you. Senator Klobuchar is supposedly on the way, so I am going to ask one question. Ms. Rollins. Yes, sir. Chairman Boozman. You are welcome to answer it. Then any thoughts that you have as you close. If she is here then, we are in great shape. If not, then we are out of here. Ms. Rollins. I am available all the time. Chairman Boozman. You are doing a wonderful job. Ms. Rollins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Boozman. Thank you. This hearing has been really good. We have had great participation, and because of that it just takes a while. Ms. Rollins. Yes, no. I am honored. Chairman Boozman. As you have heard, there are lots of questions, lots of concerns, lots of concerns in farm country. Not only that but people forget how broad the portfolio that you are taking on. We could be talking about crypto. We could be talking about a lot of stuff. Ms. Rollins. That is true. Chairman Boozman. We are not. Let me just ask you one thing that I do not think has come up is the fact that America's producers depend on USDA's voluntary, locally led conservation programs and conservation technical assistance to implement the most effective conservation practices that meet their operations' unique resource concerns. Unfortunately, in recent years, the focus has identified a lot of other things that maybe a top-down approach of pushing, prioritizing carbon sequestration, related activities on water quality, erosion control, and drought mitigation. Those things are important. Yet again, what I want you to talk about is the fact that you would be committed to voluntary, locally led, incentive-based conservation model that has served our farmers and ranchers for so many years, very effectively. Ms. Rollins. I would, Senator, and I know we all know that the best conservationists are our farmers and ranchers, certainly from the beginning of our country. One thing I do not think I have talked about with anyone on the Committee is that my family, on our farm in Minnesota, a piece of the land actually participated in one of those voluntary conservation programs. We actually have firsthand knowledge of what that looked like and how to do it, and believe certainly in how important and valuable it can be. Yes, sir, I look forward to it. Other than my personal experience--my sister, Ann, really led it, so I cannot pretend to know much, but I was very grateful for her and our family, that I do not know as much about it as I need to, and I look forward to learning more. Yes, you have my commitment that clearly that is an important piece of all of the work. Chairman Boozman. Have you got any closing comments? Ms. Rollins. I do have closing comments, but I am guessing that Senator Warnock might have another question or two. Chairman Boozman. Senator Warnock. Senator Warnock. Thank you so very much, Chair Boozman. Just a couple more questions, and thank you so very much for your presentation this morning. Farmers in Georgia are already talking to me. They are already concerned about potential retaliatory actions following President Trump's promises to levy heavy tariffs. They are already dealing with slim margins, as I said in my first round of questions. It is a tough business. Much you do not control, and it is not difficult to find yourselves in trouble there. They are dealing with slim margins due to high input costs, and the last thing they need is to be caught up in the middle of a trade war that could drive up food prices for all of us. If confirmed, what will you do from your position at USDA to ensure that Georgia's farmers and families are not caught up in a trade war? Again, it is something I have worked on, by the way, with Republicans, helping to get our farmers' goods to market, so it is something we think about a lot. Ms. Rollins. Senator Warnock, when I was in your office, I believe last month, we talked about your commitment to your farmers and what a priority this was to you. Georgia is a very important agriculture state. You are obviously pastoring a church and in the U.S. Senate. I was impressed at your commitment to your ag community in your state, and look forward to continuing to work with you. It is very clear that the coming tariffs--and I think that there is no doubt that President Trump has been very transparent, that he believes this is an extremely important tool in his toolkit, to put America first, to revive the economy, to get us back to a place where he believes we need to be. I agree with him and hope to help him execute that vision. It also should not be surprising that his heart and his commitment to our farmers and our agriculture community was certainly clear in the last administration. The number one answer from my perspective is working around the clock to expand market access and working on new trade deals and getting new partners from around the world. I have an Under Secretary already named, hopefully get him committed--confirmed; maybe committed and confirmed, Chairman Boozman--but to get him confirmed very, very quickly so we can begin to build those teams. The President is a consummate deal maker, and I feel very confident we will be able to expand those markets, begin to peel back the trade deficit, and get back to trade surpluses, which I know we are used to. Immediately moving into the distribution of disaster relief, economic relief, the new farm bill that is coming out. I have already announced the Under Secretary and put the team in place to be able to deploy that. Senator Warnock. Let me press on, just because I have so little time. I agree with you that access to farm markets is critical, and in Georgia we have got a lot of sectors that are relying on strong export markets--timber, poultry, pecans. Are you concerned that isolationist trade practices may harm our farmers' ability to access these foreign markets? Ms. Rollins. I have full confidence in President Trump's ability to lead us on this, and hopefully he and many of you have confidence in my ability to help from the ag perspective. Senator Warnock. All right. I look forward to continuing to engage you on this, if you are confirmed. Ms. Rollins. Absolutely. Senator Warnock. USDA has a long documented and unfortunate history of racial discrimination, even in recent history. I was proud to have secured funding in the Inflation Reduction Act to provide financial assistance to farmers who had previously experienced discrimination at the hands of their USDA farm lending programs. This was a meaningful step in rebuilding trust. However, USDA still has a lot of work to do, and this will only be more difficult--more difficult--following the new Administration's executive order aimed at rolling back all of this progress. I was proud Congress passed my legislation in 2021 to require USDA to create an Equity Commission, and the commission's final report provides an excellent roadmap for continuing this work. Chair Boozman, without objection, I would like to enter the USDA's 2024 Equity Report into the record. Chairman Boozman. Without objection.  Senator Warnock. Thank you so much. When we met last month you promised to read the equity report. Have you gotten a chance to read it yet? Ms. Rollins. Ninety pages and 66 recommendations. Yes, sir. Now, that has been about a little over a month ago, so please do not ask me to quote page 66. Yes. Senator Warnock. I am glad you got a chance to read it. I understand it has been removed from the website, or there is not access to it. I am glad you got a chance to read it. Will you seriously consider the recommendations of the Equity Commission's report if you are confirmed? Ms. Rollins. Senator, let me answer this way. I was really appreciative of the conversation. For me, more knowledge is always best, understanding where everyone comes from, whether I agree or disagree, recognizing what is in the past is important but also realizing the path ahead---- Senator Warnock. Will you---- Ms. Rollins . and how we forge the path. Senator Warnock. Will you consider the recommendations? Ms. Rollins. Sir, I will consider anything that is on the table. I think that is only fair. I also--President Trump won on the concept of removing the diversity, equity, and inclusion, making sure that we are basing our decisions on merit, and I obviously support that 100 percent, as well. I look forward, Senator, to continuing to talk about this. My friend, Alveda, has long talked to me about the plight of Black farmers in Georgia and other places around the country. I am always open to discussions. Always. May I say, there is no room for racism at the United States Department of Agriculture, or any---- Senator Warnock. In that regard, will you commit to recruiting more diverse employees who understand these communities, have relationships with these communities, so that we build trust between these communities and the lending offices? Ms. Rollins. Sir, my commit is to recruit the best workforce in the history of the United States Department of Agriculture, period, full stop. I believe that will include many members of all different corners of our country. Senator Warnock. Do you think a diverse workforce, high quality workforce are somehow oppositional objectives? Ms. Rollins. I think always hiring based on who is the best person for the job, who is going to do the most excellent service, who is best equipped to execute on all of the promises is the promise of America. Also believe, to your point, and have long held that ensuring that we give all people a chance to succeed and to thrive and for equal opportunity is a bedrock foundational principle of America. Senator Warnock. On that you and I agree. Thank you so very much. Ms. Rollins. Thank you, Senator. Chairman Boozman. Senator Klobuchar. Senator Klobuchar. Thank you very much, Senator Boozman, and I am hoping these will be your last three questions. Your family looks like they might want to break for lunch, but they have been very good back there. I just want you to know that. Ms. Rollins. How have the teenagers been? Senator Klobuchar. Yes, good. Ms. Rollins. I have not been able to look at them, so they have not gotten any looks from me. Hopefully---- Senator Klobuchar. According to recent reports, House Republicans are already eyeing nearly $300 billion in cuts to the SNAP program, roughly 30 percent cut. Now that is just reports. I think you have heard from some of my colleagues about how this is such an issue in rural America. In my state, as Senator Smith pointed out, our actual hunger rate is higher in rural than it is in the metropolitan areas. What kind of an impact do you think a $300 billion cut would have to SNAP, and if confirmed, will you commit to supporting robust funding for USDA's nutrition programs? Ms. Rollins. Senator, thank you. My commitment will always be to ensuring that these programs are effective and efficient, and I think I spoke from the heart, and I mean this sincerely, the importance of our leadership as a bipartisan body to ensure that those with the least among us are ably supported and do not go hungry. This is the United States of America. I do not yet know what the numbers look like. I need to really dig down. My commitment to you is that we will talk about this until the very last minute. I will always be open to you, and I look forward to ensuring that we are able to do what the original core tenets of that program are called to do. Senator Klobuchar. I will follow-up on this in a written question, but I do want to know if you believe SNAP benefits should be calculated based on current food costs. Ms. Rollins. Well, I will say that obviously current food costs, you know, the importance of the inputs into the program and understanding where the market is will always be a priority. Senator Klobuchar. Okay. Congress made significant investments in climate-smart agriculture through the Inflation Reduction Act, giving more farmers access to popular conservation programs. We had a situation where a bunch of the farm groups actually were supportive of this part of the IRA. I have always led bipartisan legislation on conservation, working with our hunting and fishing groups. One of the bills I have has been with Senator Thune, based on voluntary conservation program participation. A recent executive order, issued just, of course, in the last two days, to pause disbursements from the Inflation Reduction Act would put some of these plans that I mentioned-- CRP plans and the like--in jeopardy. What is your understanding of the impact of these executive orders, and will these orders to slow IRA disbursements impact farmers looking to use voluntary conservation programs? Ms. Rollins. My commitment is to obviously understand exactly what the target and the goal of that executive order is--I have not been read in on that yet, but I will be--and then ensuring that that aligns with what is stated in that executive order. Again, President Trump and our Administration's heart is with the rural communities and the agriculture communities and ensuring that there is full understanding and data to support what this will do. Of course, not surprisingly, Senator Klobuchar, I think the President has been very clear on his priorities on climate programs and whether taxpayer dollars should be supporting those. You know, the robust conversation I think that we will have is to follow, and I look forward to that, and you have my commitment that I am always available to discuss that and to represent ag interests, where appropriate, in those discussions with the White House. Senator Klobuchar. Okay. Thank you. I also just wanted to thank you for your commitment to the next generation of farmers and ranchers. As you know, the average age is, well, not quite as old as the U.S. Senate, but it has been creeping up, and we need new people to go into agriculture. I hope just with your background and your FFA involvement and the like, I think that would be among your many priorities would be a really smart thing to go around and talk about. I know there are plenty of people on our side of the aisle that would join you in that focus. Thank you. Ms. Rollins. Thank you, Senator. Chairman Boozman. I want to thank Mrs. Rollins for appearing before the Committee today, and also I would like to thank Ranking Member Klobuchar and all the Members of the Committee for the great participation that we had today. The Ranking Member and I have agreed that questions for the record are due by 6 p.m. tomorrow. This concludes today's hearing. Ms. Rollins. Thank you so much. Thank you. What an honor to be here. Thank you. Senator Klobuchar. Thank you.  ======================================================================= A P P E N D I X January 23, 2025 =======================================================================  ======================================================================= DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD January 23, 2025 =======================================================================  ======================================================================= QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS January 23, 2025 =======================================================================  