ALL MEANS ALL: EMPOWERING
PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES TO
THRIVE IN CAREERS AND THE WORKPLACE
----------
Thursday, February 29, 2024
U.S. Senate
Special Committee on Aging
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m., Room
106, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Robert P. Casey, Jr.,
Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
Present: Senators Casey, Blumenthal, Fetterman, Braun, Rick
Scott, and Ricketts.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR
ROBERT P. CASEY, JR., CHAIRMAN
The Chairman. Well, good morning everyone, and welcome to
the Senate Special Committee on Aging. This hearing will come
to order. This is our 12th hearing of the Special Committee on
Aging in the 118th Congress.
Today, we will discuss a topic of growing national
significance: employment for people with disabilities. As of
January 2024, the labor force participation rate of people with
disabilities was 40.5 percent. That number is up from 32.7
percent, just since April 2020, so, significant growth in that
short time period. Disability employment is at the highest
levels since recordkeeping began in 2008. More people with
disabilities are looking for, are finding, and are retaining
employment than ever before.
These increases in disability employment are happening as
more states and businesses move away from segregated,
subminimum wage employment into competitive integrated
employment. Like everything there, we have to have acronyms,
some of us may refer to it as CIE or competitive integrated
employment. This means that people with disabilities are paid
at or above minimum wage, and they also, with competitive
integrated employment, would have opportunities for
advancement, and work alongside people with disabilities and
people without disabilities. Competitive integrated employment
is possible for all people with disabilities and is the
standard for disability employment.
Let me just get our pamphlet here--in this pamphlet you can
see--I will go to the picture here, on the third panel of the
pamphlet--the pamphlet is entitled "Competitive Integrated
Employment, the Standard for Disability Employment" and then on
this panel we make reference to Hannah, who is a sales
associate. She is a young woman with intellectual developmental
delays from southeastern Pennsylvania who is working in the
stockroom at her retail job. You can also see, on another panel
here, Chris, right on the bottom here. Chris is a deaf-blind
man from central Pennsylvania, working as an accessibility
engineer from his computer at home, so, there is a lot of
variety to this employment.
Competitive integrated employment is truly possible when we
work with businesses and workers to create situations that work
for everyone, that work for the employees as well as the
employer. That is why my Transformation to Competitive
Integrated Employment Act, the so-called TCIEA, legislation
provides essential support to states and businesses to
facilitate successful transitions to competitive integrated
employment. Senator Daines from Montana is a co-sponsor of that
bill. This bill makes it so people with disabilities who want
to work will be able to work.
Workplaces across the country have achieved this reality,
and we will highlight that success in today's hearing. We will
hear from experts and people with lived experience about what
people with disabilities need to thrive in the workplace.
Our witnesses will be able to speak about successful
employment outcomes in various work environments, from small
businesses to large corporations. With the right support,
people with disabilities can thrive in their work environments,
and we must create an ecosystem that supports their ability to
do so. This happens by ensuring they find a good match in an
employer. It happens by creating healthy work environments that
balance the right combination of natural supports and
reasonable accommodations so that people can thrive in the
workplace, and it happens by ensuring businesses have the
proper resources and the support they need to provide their
employees with these healthy work environments.
That is why I am also proud to once again sponsor the
Disability Employment Incentive Act during this Congress. This
bill would expand three existing tax benefits to businesses
that successfully hire and retain people with disabilities. The
Disability Employment Incentive Act would help support
businesses that hire people with disabilities in competitive
integrated employment. This bill supports the transition to a
fully integrated workforce where people with disabilities work
alongside people without disabilities, for equal compensation,
and have the same opportunities for advancement as their peers.
We have seen substantial progress in disability employment
in recent years, as we made references to the gain in
percentage of the people that are in the workforce, but even
with this progress over just a few short years, people with
disabilities continue to work at almost half the rate of people
without disabilities, so, when we increase from 32.7 to 40.5 in
the workforce participation rate, that was great growth for a
short period of time, but still at that 40.5 level, that is
still half the rate of labor force participation compared to
those without disabilities, so we can do more and must do more
to employ people with disabilities.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses who will
provide lived experience to the Committee and to the Nation and
also, we will hear about solutions to further increase
competitive integrated employment for people with disabilities.
Now, I turn to Ranking Member Braun.
STATEMENT OF SENATOR MIKE BRAUN, RANKING MEMBER
Senator Braun. Thank you, Chairman Casey, and thanks to the
witnesses here today.
It is great to see a record number of Americans with
disabilities being employed. I hope we can continue these gains
despite economic turbulence, with inflation at levels we have
not seen in a long time, over three percent, and high interest
rates to boot, but we can generally get through that as a
country, and I think we will this time, as well.
My home state prioritizes the ability of Hoosiers with
disabilities to earn a living and support themselves and their
families. Indiana is a proud "Employment First" State. This
means understanding how hardworking, motivated, and
entrepreneurial these individuals are. We will learn more about
this today from Jeff Mittman, the CEO of Bosma, a great Hoosier
himself, and an organization that goes above and beyond.
Indiana is blessed to have many businesses and
organizations empowering people with disabilities. In Knox
County, for instance, a county near where I live, KCARC invests
in commercial sewing and other manufacturing equipment to
accommodate workers with disabilities. It talks about its
workforce as a commitment to freedom for people with
disabilities to work when and how they want. We should keep
that freedom in mind as we consider the best strategies to help
with employment and be careful to avoid limiting choices.
Opportunity Enterprises in Indiana connects Hoosiers with
disabilities to good jobs and helps other businesses learn to
do the same. It appreciates flexibility in policy. It is clear
that one size does not fit all when it comes to disability
employment and policy.
That is why a growing number of individuals starting their
own businesses to improve their own economic security. As a
former small business owner, I am always happy to promote
initiatives that encourage entrepreneurship and businesses at
the smallest level. It can be rewarding for employers,
employees, and the communities in which their businesses serve.
People with disabilities are more likely to be self-
employed than those without. It may not seem intuitive but that
is interesting, because I think they, with those challenges,
are going to have to be entrepreneurial and innovative to
sometimes make their way. I like that. There are currently more
than 1.8 million business owners with disabilities in the
U.S.--that is a lot. We must continue to support these
entrepreneurial individuals so they can start and expand their
own businesses.
Senator Shaheen and I introduced the Supporting Disabled
Entrepreneurs Act, which directs the Small Business
Administration to designate a Coordinator for Disabled Small
Business Concerns and collect voluntary data on the disability
status of small business owners. This is an important first
step in removing some of the barriers for disabled small
business owners and ensuring they have access to SBA programs.
I thank the Chairman for his support of this legislation.
I look forward to hearing more from the witnesses today in
how we can make things work better for all of you.
Thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Ranking Member Braun. Now I will
introduce each of our witnesses and then we will get to their
testimony.
Our first witness is Ms. Erin Willman. Ms. Willman is the
founder and CEO of White Cane Coffee Company. She will share
her experiences as a business owner with disabilities who
employs people with disabilities in Warren County,
Pennsylvania, so thank you, Ms. Willman, for being here today,
for sharing your story with us, and traveling a great distance.
That is a good ride from Warren County.
I will now turn to Ranking Member Braun to introduce our
second witness.
Senator Braun. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Jeff Mittman is the
President and CEO of Bosma Enterprises. He is also President of
the National Association for the Employment of People Who are
Blind. He retired as a master sergeant after over 20 years in
the Army. In all these roles he is dedicated to service. Thank
you for all your service, Mr. Mittman, along the way, and thank
you for being here today.
The Chairman. Our third witness is Mr. Frank Hellmer. Mr.
Hellmer is a full-time data analyst, graduate student, and
trained accountant. He is also a self-advocate with autism who,
early in his career, worked at a business that paid him
subminimum wage. Mr. Hellmer will share his experiences
transitioning from a subminimum wage job to a competitive and
integrative career where he uses his extensive skills and
ability. Mr. Hellmer, thank you for sharing your story with us
today.
Our fourth and final witness is Dr. Lauren Avellone. Dr.
Avellone is an Associate Professor at Virginia Commonwealth
University in Richmond, Virginia. Her work focuses on
supporting people with complex disabilities to find and retain
competitive integrated jobs. Dr. Avellone, thank you for
sharing your expertise and for being with us today.
Now we will start with each of our witness statements, and
we will start with Ms. Willman. You can begin.
STATEMENT OF ERIN WILLMAN, FOUNDER AND CEO,
WHITE CANE COFFEE COMPANY, WARREN, PENNSYLVANIA
Ms. Willman. Hello. I am Erin Willman. I am the Founder and
CEO of White Cane Coffee. Before I begin, I would like to thank
Senator Casey, Senator Braun, and all of the members of the
Aging Committee for inviting me to come down to this Nation's
great capital and for having me here to speak on a subject that
is very dear to my heart.
When I lost my vision at the age of 15, I went through a
very familiar experience for many disabled teenagers. I started
to question what my future was going to look like. As many
young people do, I went looking for employment only to be met
with rejection time and time again due to the fact that people
could see was my white cane and all of the things I could not
do, instead of all of the things I was capable of.
After all this time and all of the continuous rejections I
started to become discouraged. I was beginning to question what
my worth was.
After going to the Office of Vocational Rehabilitation I
was told that I would never be able to have competitive
employment.
Thankfully, I have wonderful and supportive family members.
On a particularly bad day my dad tried to cheer me up by
playing a game. It was a thought experiment on what I would do
if I could create a job, since I could not find one. We had
come up with a coffee business. My reasoning at the time was
that coffee is something that is known to bring people
together, so why not use that to bring both able-bodied and
disabled people together?
We kept talking about it for days until we realized we
could create a business like the one we imagined, and we named
it White Cane Coffee.
From that very first discussion we knew we wanted to do two
things with the company. We wanted to have Braille on all of
our packaging, and second, we wanted to hire other people with
disabilities so that they could have the same opportunity for
competitive employment. I figured that if I was not getting
hired due to my disability, others in my community might not be
faring much better.
Now, I knew at the time a little bit about the sheltered
workshops due to my older brother working in one for a time
when I was younger. While working there he was only being paid
$1.50 an hour, which is not only much less than minimum wage in
Pennsylvania, but he was also losing money due to the price of
transit. He was also not allowed to pack a hot lunch or use the
microwave in the kitchen, and the able-bodied staff not only
looked down on him and the other disabled employees but kept a
cold distance from them. Needless to say, he was my first
employee.
Meanwhile, at White Cane Coffee, our staff has full access
to warm meals and have always been treated with respect. Some
businesses treat their employees as liabilities. We always
treat ours as assets.
As my business grew from an online store to a brick-and-
mortar shop, I was able to hire more people with disabilities.
That growth has also given me the privilege to speak with
schools for the blind to discuss with the students about their
futures.
I will never forget when we hired an employee, we will call
Jay. He had also worked at a sheltered workshop. When he came
to us he said that he was willing to work for $7.25 or less.
The "or less" caught our attention. Along the way in his life,
someone had made him feel like he was worth less. To this day I
am deeply upset that he was made to feel that way, but I also
think of all of the other disabled people in this country who
are either going through such an ordeal or already have.
When we hired him we made sure that he knew that he had
worth, that he would be starting at $9 an hour, and we could
not wait to see him come in on Monday. He has been an
incredible employee since that day. No matter what he is always
on time, even when he has to walk in terrible weather. He also
has risen in our business and is now a team leader and is
teaching other employees. All of this because someone believed
in him.
I have noticed the same loyalty and drive in all of my
employees. I have never before heard a group of people speak so
enthusiastically about their jobs and being able to talk to
their families about what they have been doing at work.
Since opening our company, we have won numerous ethical
employment awards due to the fact that we treat people like
people. If one small coffee manufacturing company in
Pennsylvania can achieve such success, then there is no reason
for larger companies to not do the same.
Even making smaller changes to adapt the workplace
increases productivity and morale while also lowering employee
turnover. The rhetoric that people do not want to work anymore
is simply untrue. People want to work. They just want to be
treated and paid what they deserve.
I have always said that if you change one life you change
the world. By passing the Transformation to Competitive
Employment Act you will be changing countless lives. I implore
you all, change the world. Thank you.
The Chairman. Ms. Willman, thank you very much for your
testimony.
We will turn next to Mr. Mittman.
STATEMENT OF JEFFREY E. MITTMAN, PRESIDENT AND
CEO, BOSMA ENTERPRISES, AND PRESIDENT,
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE EMPLOYMENT OF
THE PEOPLE WHO ARE BLIND, INDIANAPOLIS, INDIANA
Mr. Mittman. Chairman Casey, Ranking Member Braun, and
members of the Committee, thank you for allowing me to be here
today.
I am Jeffrey Mittman, the President and CEO of Bosma
Enterprises, a nonprofit social enterprise based in
Indianapolis, Indiana. At Bosma we are the largest employer of
Hoosiers who are blind and the only provider of comprehensive
blind rehabilitation in the State of Indiana. We employ nearly
200 individuals, 50 percent of whom are blind and work at all
levels of the organization.
In 2005, I was deployed to Iraq and was critically injured
in an ambush by an improvised explosive device that took the
majority of my eyesight. After several years of medical care
and recovery I restarted my career at National Industries for
the Blind and was introduced to the AbilityOne program, a
program that today employs nearly 40,000 Americans with
disabilities.
After leaving NIB I went to work at the Defense Finance and
Accounting Service, and while I was there I simultaneously
served the board of directors at Bosma Enterprises, and was
eventually appointed as the President and CEO of that fine
organization.
Employment is the backbone of society. It allows for
economic independence and allows individuals to take care of
their families.
The AbilityOne program was designed to create opportunities
for people who are disabled, and it dos that through the
procurement of government goods and services at a fair market
price. There are currently 500 organizations all across the
country within the AbilityOne program, and it was at one of
those organizations two decades ago that a blind individual
created the suspension system and the padding that I wore in my
helmet that day, that took a full bomb blast to my head. The
AbilityOne program and that individual saved my life.
At Bosma Enterprises we are the primary provider of
examination and surgical gloves for the Department of Veterans
Affairs through AbilityOne. Our employees are paid competitive
wages and benefits and are extremely proud of the service they
provide our Nation's veterans and were vital to protecting
those veterans during the pandemic. See, at Bosma our mission
is to provide opportunities for people who are blind, and we do
that through a work environment that allows them to thrive and
meet their goals.
In addition to employment, Bosma provides blind
rehabilitation and training, and we came about doing those
programs when the State of Indiana asked to transition them to
us because they saw how effective we were employing people who
were blind and how well we did, but those programs run at a
deficit, but this public-private partnership thrives because of
the AbilityOne program, the State of Indiana, and our donors'
generosity.
As part of those programs I have a dedicated team of
individuals who assist people in finding employment outside of
our organization. You see, the freedom to work where you choose
is important. Much like employment is the backbone of society,
the freedom of choice is vital to all of us as individuals.
Unfortunately, sometimes for blind individual that freedom
of choice has been restricted. The government sometimes
severely limits or excludes AbilityOne providers as an
employment choice for people who are blind or disabled. I think
that is due, really, to a misunderstanding and an inconsistent
application of the definition of CIE.
You see, I think we run into trouble when we say somebody
who is blind working next to somebody blind, that job is of
less value than it is for somebody is blind working next to
somebody who is not, and as a wounded warrior we never tell a
wounded warrior where they could work or that they couldn't
work with other wounded warriors, and as I described, as Bosma,
our employees receive cross-training, upward mobility. As a
matter of fact, 15 of my leaders in the organization are blind
or visually impaired, and we are an employer of choice because
of that. That is evidenced by our low turnover rate and our
high employment satisfaction surveys, the scores.
I am extremely proud of Bosma. As I said, we offer them
cross-training, we offer them upward mobility, and we will
assist them in leaving the organization if they would like to
work somewhere else, so I see our program, the AbilityOne
program, Bosma is a vital source for employment for people who
are blind, and with that I thank you again for having me here
today.
The Chairman. Mr. Mittman, thank you for your testimony and
thank you for your service to the country.
We will next turn to Mr. Hellmer.
STATEMENT OF FRANK HELLMER, DATA ANALYST
AND SELF-ADVOCATE, LITTLE ROCK, ARKANSAS
Mr. Hellmer. My name is Frank Hellmer, and I would like to
start off by thanking you all for having me here to testify
before the Senate Aging Committee concerning my experience with
subminimum wage workshops and competitive integrated
employment. I am honored and thankful to you all for this
opportunity.
I am a person with autism who has worked hard and has been
blessed with a good job, currently as a data analyst at a major
health insurer called Centene Corporation. Centene, in my
experience, has one of the most inclusive hiring processes I
have ever seen, going above and beyond the letter of the
Americans with Disabilities Act to embody the spirit of
disability employment. I am testifying today on my own
initiative, and do not represent Centene or claim Centene's
endorsement for being here.
Two things I like about my job are having supportive
coworkers as well as having work that challenges my mind in a
way similar to puzzles. I develop and run SQL scripts, a type
of software code, to extract data from data bases and send it
to its stakeholders. I enjoy it when I get to learn a new trick
or new way to do something with my programming skills.
One thing that makes my job accessible is a flexible work
schedule, where as long as I am getting stuff done and
producing results they are not too concerned about strict
hours. I also work from home, which is helpful for when things
get frustrating at work, so I can be as expressive as I want to
be and no one has to know about it at work. The flexible
schedule also helps me to be able to go to the grocery store
with my home and community-based waiver staff during the day
and then come back and make up those hours later in the day or
later in the week.
Being able to earn good wages has enabled me to obtain my
own apartment, go back to school to finish my master's in
health informatics, purchase a gaming computer, Nintendo
Switch, and Xbox Series S, among numerous other blessings. In
my free time, I like to play classic computer games like Doom
and Quake due to the multitude of user-made mods and content
available for them.
I am able to work in competitive integrated employment
because Arkansas has a somewhat unusual program called Workers
with Disabilities Medicaid. I am a beneficiary of the Community
and Employment Supports (CES) waiver program, which has a 10-
year waitlist. Normally a person on Workers with Disabilities
Medicaid cannot earn more than three times the monthly SSI
rate, supplemental security income, per month without losing
their Medicaid waiver eligibility. However, the Arkansas
Workers with Disabilities Medicaid program overrides that
limitation so that you can earn as much as you want and still
maintain your waiver services. With my increased wages, I am
able to buy better groceries and stuff that I like, which are
mainly electronics and video games. I am also able to save for
the future and for retirement as well.
In May 2016, I graduated from Arkansas Tech University with
a 3.9 GPA and a double major in accounting and business data
analytics. I was able to get through college in large part due
to very supportive faculty, who looked out for me. I also met
my best friend, Pastor Miller, there, who preaches at Glen Rose
Missionary Baptist Church, where I still attend today. He made
me feel welcome and included me on field trips for professional
organizations, like the Society for Human Resource Management
and their conferences.
In December 2016, I passed the CPA exam, certified public
accountant exam--I am not a licensed CPA--and in 2017, I
started an internship to obtain my CPA hours. However, pushing
for all these goals left little time for me to properly process
my grief over my mom's passing from cancer in 2015, and so I
mentally broke down in 2018, halting my internship for over a
year while I recovered in various institutions before finally
being able to get fast-tracked onto a CES waiver. I am thankful
especially to my friends who continued to believe in me during
this dark time and moved mountains to ensure I had the
resources and care I needed to recover. Most people would have
given up on me.
In 2019, I started working in a subminimum wage workshop,
working 30 hours per week and making between $30 to $120 every
two weeks. At the workshop, I worked in a wash bay, washing
cars and machinery. I one time spent an hour inside a car on a
hot summer day, washing stuff. In the middle of 2019, the
workshop had a rate adjustment, and our wages started to go
down. By October 2019, when I got a $35 check for working 30
hours per week for two weeks, I quit because the work made me
feel exploited.
After quitting, I went back to finish my internship, which
I had started back in 2017. A couple of months later, a job
opportunity came open at Centene, which my financial guardian
alerted me to. I applied for it, went through the interview
process, and am happily working there today. My 4-year
anniversary will be in May 2024.
Thank you all.
The Chairman. Mr. Hellmer, thanks for your testimony. It is
an inspiring story.
Next, Dr. Avellone.
STATEMENT OF LAUREN AVELLONE, PH.D., ASSOCIATE
PROFESSOR, REHABILITATION RESEARCH AND
TRAINING CENTER, VIRGINIA COMMONWEALTH
UNIVERSITY, RICHMOND, VIRGINIA
Dr. Avellone. Thank you to the Committee for allowing me to
speak with you today about a topic that I feel deserves renewed
attention and pressing changes, and thank you, Mr. Mittman, for
your service.
Employment is a major life activity for most adults. While
we have seen recent increases in employment among Americans
with disabilities, they still participate in the workforce at
much lower rates than their peer without disabilities and are
more likely to be working part-time and in jobs below their
potential. They are also legally allowed to be paid below the
Federal minimum wage, as a condition of their employment
through the issuance of 14c certificates by the U.S. Department
of Labor. In many cases, they are paid less than $3.50 an hour.
Put plainly, people with disabilities are a massively
underutilized group of talented individuals, many of whom want
to work and could contribute significantly to our workforce.
I have spent the majority of my career assisting those with
the most significant support needs access education and
employment. These are individuals who are skilled and capable
people but who also happen to need extra help in areas of daily
life. These individuals are at the highest risk of being
excluded from work. I would like to be clear that when I say
individuals with disabilities should have greater opportunities
for workforce participation, I am including those with high
support needs.
When I refer to work I mean competitive integrated
employment, as defined in the Workforce Innovation and
Opportunity Act of 2014. This is full-or part-time work among
people who do not have disabilities, with pay, benefits, and
opportunities for advancement that are equal to those received
by people with similar experience and credentials. I am
referring to the same type of work Americans without
disabilities choose to pursue, not work in segregated settings
or those that pay below the Federal minimum wage.
This distinction is important because people with
disabilities who participate in competitive integrated
employment experience improved quality of life the same as
those without disabilities. They demonstrate significant growth
in major areas of personal independence, including home living,
community engagement, life-long learning, health and safety,
socialization, and self-advocacy skills.
We now have over 40 years of research identifying evidence-
based practices that lead to competitive integrated employment.
These interventions do not require preparatory training before
pursuing work. They are personalized to meet the unique needs
of every individual, they include direct support from a service
provider, and heavily consider the needs of both a person with
a disability and the business, which results in a job match
that is mutually advantageous for both.
Despite these interventions, we still see persistently low
employment outcomes. It is difficult to see how the needle will
be moved if the following areas are not addressed: making
specialized transportation options more available, reliable,
and affordable so people with disabilities can get to and from
work; professionalizing the role of the employment support
provider so that those implementing evidence-based employment
interventions are adequately trained; increasing funding for
long-term supports, which promote long-term job retention and
upward mobility; increasing work-based learning experiences to
ensure that youth and young adults have applied work
opportunities prior to exiting high school; increasing access
to post-secondary education programs for students with
intellectual and developmental disabilities to engage in career
preparation and training; making sure all people understand how
to work and keep their disability benefits; and eliminating 14c
certificates that enable workers with disabilities to be paid
below the Federal minimum wage.
It is time we stopped thinking about who can work and who
cannot work and instead be thinking about what we can do to
help all people with a desire to work become employed. As we
look to the future, I hope to see employment outcomes for all
individuals with disabilities greatly improve, not only in
terms of becoming employed but also in terms of higher quality
employment outcomes that reflect higher wages, more full-time
employment, long-term job retention, greater access to fringe
benefits, more advancement and upward mobility, and the
securement of more diverse jobs in a variety of industries.
Thank you for the opportunity to share.
The Chairman. Dr. Avellone, thanks very much for your
testimony.
As everyone knows, on a Thursday we have Senators who will
be in and out of the hearing, and I want to, in this case, cede
my time for now to my colleague from Pennsylvania, Senator
Fetterman.
Senator Fetterman. Thank you, so as we have today, you
know, people with disabilities are sometimes paid pennies an
hour. I have said for years that we need to raise our Federal
minimum wage, and that should be up to, at least as a minimum
of $15 an hour. Right now, it is now, federally, it is now
$7.25 an hour, but really, to just put that in perspective, $15
an hour, working full-time, that is $31,000 a year, and that is
challenging to live on that. Can you imagine, and there are
millions of Americans that are faced having to do on that as
well too.
Now the fact is that we have people being paid $1.50 an
hour simply because they have a disability, and that is
outrageous, and I would like to point out that I have a
disability, and having that disability I am not getting paid
any less than all of my colleagues here at the table or in the
Senate as well too, and now to discuss my own disability at the
moment, right now, because after a stroke, now I rely on
captioning. That allows me to participate fully as well, and I
am going to descry be what it is. This allows me to participate
fully, and now I am not earning any less money a year for the
same job that all my colleagues are, as well too, and I would
not want that for me, and I would not want that for anyone on
that, as well too, so to the point is, like, Dr. Avellone, what
is the evidence that employers cannot afford to pay employees
with disabilities a livable--and I want to also emphasize on a
dignified wage?
Dr. Avellone. Well, the truth is that if those employers
were having any other individual who does not have a disability
performing that work, they would have to pay at least the
Federal minimum wage, so from a finance structure there does
not make any sense to me in terms of how that cannot be worked
out.
Senator Fetterman. Well, I mean, so to be clear, so I want
people to understand that folks with disabilities are able to
be legally allowed to be paid less than the Federal minimum
wage.
Dr. Avellone. Yes, that is correct.
Senator Fetterman. Yes, and the minimum wage is $7.25 an
hour.
Dr. Avellone. That is correct.
Senator Fetterman. It is legal to pay less than that, which
is already an outrageously low amount of money, so is that
legal to pay someone with a disability, say, $2 an hour? Is
that legal?
Dr. Avellone. It is legal to pay somebody less, as low as
$3.50 an hour, and even less than that, pennies on the hour.
Senator Fetterman. Okay. What kind of dignity is being paid
less than even already shameless low minimum wage? Is there any
dignity in that?
Dr. Avellone. No. These are capable and talented workers
who can contribute immensely to the workforce, and they should
be compensated for their efforts the same as any other American
without a disability.
Senator Fetterman. That is the point. It is like I
fundamentally believe that there is dignity in every job and in
working, but how are you able to really have the dignity if you
are legally allowed to be paid pennies on the hour on that, let
alone living at all without even dignity, as well too, and I
want the opportunity to just highlight that fact, as well.
As a member of the disability community myself, I would not
want that for myself, and I absolutely do not want that for
anyone. I always thought I was empathetic before, but after I
developed my own disability that has made me much, much more
empathetic, and now I am grateful for having my platform to
highlight that and to address that, hopefully, in our society,
as well too, so thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Senator Fetterman, thanks very much and
thanks for sharing your own personal story with us.
I will next turn to Ranking Member Braun.
Senator Braun. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I will yield my
time to the Senator from Nebraska.
Senator Ricketts. Great. Thank you very much. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member, for holding this hearing
today. I appreciate it. Thank you to our witnesses for being
here today.
People with disabilities are living longer due to
advancements in medical technology and public health, and in
order for people with disabilities to achieve financial
security, which is what we all want--they want to have it
during their working years and they want to have it in
retirement--they need employment opportunities and supportive
services to help them secure and maintain good-paying jobs. It
is just absolutely vital.
Studies show that employing individuals with disabilities
is good business. Individuals with disabilities offer many
advantages including a highly motivated workforce, lower rates
of absenteeism and employee turnover, greater loyalty, and
higher rates of satisfaction and productivity among the entire
workforce, and as Governor of the State of Nebraska, when I
would talk to employers, one of the things they always said is,
"We cannot find enough people to hire." Maybe they just weren't
looking in the right place. Nebraska has talented people who
want to work, regardless of disability.
Back home in my State we are working to make sure that we
are affording opportunities to be able to hire people with
disabilities and pay competitively for those talents.
Individuals with intellectual or developmental disabilities in
the workforce in Nebraska receive coordinated employment
services through vocational rehabilitation, through a
partnership with the Nebraska Department of Education, Nebraska
Commission for the Blind and Visually Impaired, and the
Department of Health and Human Services.
The partnership works toward competitive integrated
employment that includes pay at or above minimum wage, that is
not less than what others without a disability are receiving
for the same type of job at a location where the employee
interacts with other employees without disabilities in
comparable positions and has opportunities for advancement. The
partnership also provides career counseling, employment
information, and referrals to individuals with disabilities who
want to work, so it is absolutely critical that we leverage all
the talent in our country with this workforce shortage and make
sure that people with disabilities have those opportunities.
Actually, I will start with Mr. Mittman again. Thank you
very much, Mr. Mittman, for your service. You have extensive
experience managing and working with disabled employees. Can
you speak to some of the most common misconceptions about
employing a disabled worker?
Mr. Mittman. Thank you, Senator. I believe some of the
biggest misconceptions about employing people with disabilities
is just the misconception that they do not have the same skills
as everybody else, because they do. I believe also that when it
comes to accommodations on the site, in the workplace, I think
a lot of employers believe that there is a significant expense
to those accommodations, which is just not true. I have seen a
recent study recently where I think the average accommodation
was $300, or something like that, so it is a miseducation of
employers that they believe that employing somebody with a
disability could bring additional liabilities and additional
expenses, and I think those are the greatest common
misperceptions out there.
Senator Ricketts. Mr. Mittman, you are running your own
business. You know that hiring and training a worker is
expensive, right----
Mr. Mittman. Yes, sir.
Senator Ricketts . just in time. How would you
compare the cost of attracting somebody to work for you and
training them versus the cost of the accommodation?
Mr. Mittman. Well, people with disabilities have a very low
turnover rate. They have a very low turnover rate, and when you
bring somebody in who has struggled to find employment, they
are very loyal to the organization. They have a lower absentee
rate. They stay for a long time, so the investment in the
employee is much cheaper and costs a lot less than it does if
you having to turn over your employees all the time, so it is
absorbed into the loyalty and the effectiveness and the
abilities of the individual.
Senator Ricketts. Would you say the benefit of the
accommodation, in which you said one study showed there was
like $300----
Mr. Mittman. Approximately.
Senator Ricketts . the cost, approximately
$300, is far outweighed by the benefit of having somebody who
you retain longer because it costs so much to attract and
retain people. Is that a fair statement, right?
Mr. Mittman. Yes, yes.
Senator Ricketts. Actually, the cost benefit tradeoff here
for employers is when you hire people with disabilities who you
are going to be able to keep longer, you are going to have less
turnover, that benefit is going to far outweigh the extra cost
of accommodation.
Mr. Chairman, I am just about out of time. I have just got
one more question I would like to ask Mr. Mittman, if I could.
The Chairman. Sure. Sure.
Senator Ricketts. Mr. Mittman, could you talk a little
bit--so given that we believe here that, you know, the cost
accommodation is going to be far outweighed by the benefit of
the lower turnover rate, which is just one example, what is the
best way to educate employers about these misconceptions and
overcoming some of these misconceptions?
Mr. Mittman. Well, I know that Bosma Enterprises, as I
mentioned, had a dedicated team of individuals who assist
people who are blind and visually impaired find employment, and
one of the things they do, one of their biggest tasks is as
they are out assisting individuals find that employment they
are actually educating the employers prior to the employee
showing up and sharing the experience and sharing what we are
talking about, the long-term benefits of hiring somebody with a
disability, but being in there and working directly with the
employers is the best way, and active engagement of the
employers is the best way to educate them on the benefits of
hiring somebody who is disabled.
Senator Ricketts. Great. Well, thank you, Mr. Mittman,
again. Thank you for being here and thanks to all the witnesses
for being here today.
Mr. Mittman. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Ricketts. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Senator Ricketts, thank you. I will go to my
questions and I will start with Ms. Willman. As we have heard
today a number of inspiring stories, and I wanted to ask you a
question about what you faced before you started your business.
You shared during your testimony that you started the White
Cane Coffee Company because you had trouble getting employers
to see your true potential. In fact, in your testimony you
said, and I am quoting, "I went looking for employment only to
be met with rejection time and time again, due to the fact that
all people could see was my white cane and all of the things I
couldn't do, instead of the things I was capable of."
Then you went on to start the company, White Cane Coffee,
now 12 employees along with 76 affiliate employees across the
country. These include blind persons who work from their home,
and now White Cane Coffee is a sought-after employer in your
community. You hire, retain, and promote people with
disabilities, and accessibility is part of your company
culture.
I would ask you this. After facing all those difficulties
of finding a job yourself, how does it make you feel to be able
to hire people who have faced similar challenges that you have?
Ms. Willman. It is a wonderful feeling to give back to my
community and to raise up other people with disabilities
because they have gone through probably worse things than I
have, whether they were disabled due to an accident, born
disabled, or have become disabled due to aging, and,
unfortunately, there is bullying when it comes to disability.
When they come to work for me they get to find a sense of
community, and you can hear it in their voice how much that
means to them, so I am as proud as can be of all of my
employees, and whenever I hear them I am very thankful for the
chance I have been given to be able to get them that help.
The Chairman. Well, we thank you for the example you are
providing for other employers. What are your plans to grow your
business and to continue to be a model employer?
Ms. Willman. I mean, the ultimate goal is to have a White
Cane all over the country. Wherever there are disabled people
there should be somewhere that they can have gainful
employment, so why not a White Cane Coffee?
The Chairman. That is great. Well, we are happy to hear
about that, and before I turn to Ranking Member Braun, I do
want to ask Mr. Hellmer a question about his experience. You
shared with us you needed to work a subminimum wage job. Am I
right that you, in terms of the timeline here, you were working
at that subminimum wage job that you described at the end of
your testimony after you had passed the CPA exam?
Mr. Hellmer. Yes, sir. Yes, Chairman Casey. I was in that
subminimum wage workshop after I had passed the CPA exam.
The Chairman. Even though you were working between 30 and
35 hours per week you were only being paid between $35 and $120
for your work. You found a career that pays you a fair wage.
You have current success, and your current success is a real
testament to your potential, and a reminder that we should not
unfairly judge people because of their disability, and while
you no longer work for subminimum wages there are currently
42,000 employees nationwide who do.
Mr. Hellmer, what can you share about your experience
working in a subminimum wage workshop, sharing information
about that that would provide folks out there a sense of the
reality of that but also some inspiration for those who are
doing that work now to be able to rise above it if we can
continue to get employers to change their perspective.
Mr. Hellmer. Mm-hmm. Thank you, Chairman Casey, and the
subminimum wage workshop, in the summer it got really hot and
sweaty in there. We would load these giant trays, the
Caterpillar trays that equipment manufacturers, you would have
these giant black trays that had oil on them. You would stick
them, two at a time, in this giant water tank, heated water
tank, and then rinse it off, and then you would wipe it down
and all that, and we were doing all that just to get between
$35 and $120 every two weeks, and you would wrap them with
wrapping tape and all that, so it was just a lot of work, a lot
of sweat for nothing.
The Chairman. Yep. Well, we are grateful to hear about how
you have been able to progress beyond that, and we are grateful
that you are here today with us.
I will turn next to Ranking Member Braun.
Senator Braun. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First question will
be for Mr. Mittman. Many employers strive to integrate people
with disabilities into the workplace alongside their non-
disabled peers. You mentioned in your testimony the standard
for integration can be unfair, even for major sources of
employment like AbilityOne. Could you expand upon that a little
bit?
Mr. Mittman. Absolutely, Senator. It can be unfair in that
as the President of NAEPB and as the present CEO of Bosman
Enterprises I can tell you that our organizations did away with
14c years ago. All our employees are paid competitive wages and
benefits, and I think what is going on is I think sometimes the
AbilityOne program gets wrapped up into the concept of a
sheltered workshop, which I would argue we haven't been in
decades. The AbilityOne program of 2024 is not the AbilityOne
program of 1975. There are a lot of modernization efforts that
go on.
We do provide those competitive wages and benefits, we do
provide upward mobility, and we even provide assistance to our
employees who want to work somewhere else, and I think
sometimes we are unfairly categorized as that sheltered
workshop and not competitive integrated employment, and I think
that needs to change because as I said, it is the individual's
choice of where they really want to work. If they are being
paid competitive wages and benefits and then have a chance of
upward mobility, I think they should have the choice to work
there, to be offered that option as they go through the
vocational rehab at the various states.
Senator Braun. Thank you for that, and then one thing
caught my attention. You have Youth Services. Briefly, can you
talk about how that has worked and what that is about, because
it seems like it would even be harder to engage young people
with disabilities into a business. How have you been able to
accomplish that?
Mr. Mittman. Well, sir, we have the Student Training and
Employment Program, because what we found with youth who are
blind or visually impaired, most of them had no work
experience. They didn't know how to be an employee because they
had never experienced that, so what we do is as they are coming
out of high school, as they are coming through high school--
pardon me--and they are preparing to graduate we bring them in
and find them opportunities to work throughout the community
during the summer and sometimes during the year, depending on
their schedules, and it gives them that concept of what is
required to being a good employee, showing up on time at the
right place, doing the right thing, and we are able to provide
them that opportunity and expand their network and get that
experience as they either move on to further education or move
out to the workforce.
Senator Braun. Very good. Thank you.
Dr. Avellone, K through 12 disability career readiness is a
topic. Is that receiving the attention it needs? I know in my
own home State, where I live, K through 12 education,
especially middle school and high school, is still not matching
up high-demand, high-wage jobs with what the marketplace needs.
Talk about that as it applies to disability.
Dr. Avellone. Yes. Thank you for the question. I think we
have made great strides in recent decades in terms of
recognizing the need to better prepare transition-age youth for
employment, particularly the advent of the pre-employment
transition services, which are focused on helping youth and
young adults gain five different areas of preparation in order
to move into competitive integrated employment.
I think one of the weakest areas that we see is an emphasis
on work-based learning experiences. I spoke to that in my
testimony just a bit. Work-based learning experiences provide
real work opportunities for youth. It creates opportunities for
them to engage in applied settings, work with actual employers
to gain a resume, apply work skills, gain experience in terms
of having a resume when they leave to better position them to
apply for jobs, and also creates an opportunity for them to
have a network to find employment after they leave school.
We know that experience in work during high school is a
significant predictor of competitive integrated employment
after high school, and so we need to increase our emphasis on
promoting those opportunities for youth before they are at the
age where they are entering employment.
Senator Braun. Thank you. Ms. Willman, from one
entrepreneur to another, I know when I went into that direction
sometimes it is a daunting because you are sticking your neck
out. You want the independence. It is euphoric when you get
going, and it is a great place to be once you make it through
the one-to two-year period, which calls out so many, five
years, even 10 years.
What would you advise to other entrepreneurs interested,
disabled? What was the thing or two that enabled you to make it
through all of the gauntlet of challenge to get where you are?
Ms. Willman. One thing I would always say is to start small
and then work your way up, but more importantly surround
yourself who know things you don't. For example, I am terrible
at math. Anyone who knows me knows I am horrific at math.
Someone who isn't horrific at math is one of my employees. I
have surrounded myself with people who know things I don't
know, so I listen to them, and take their advice, and with
their help I am able to build a better working environment.
Yes, surround yourself with people who are smarter than you
at things. It seems sort of weird, and also surround yourself
with people who believe in you but not people who will agree
with just everything you say. Sometimes you will have an idea,
and once you say it out loud to someone, they will let you know
that it is the dumbest idea they have ever heard, and that is
okay.
Senator Braun. Good advice, and one final question for Mr.
Hellmer. You were lucky to find a place like Centene. From your
observation, are there enough Centenes out there, and when you
were looking did you have other options, or were you lucky to
have found Centene because there weren't many out there?
Mr. Hellmer. There needs to be a lot more Centenes out
there that have integrative hiring processes and inclusive
employment and all that. There needs to be a lot more Centenes
out there, yes.
Senator Braun. Very good. I am glad it worked for you, and
I think that is a notice to businesses out there, maybe expand
your horizons. You might end up being lucky getting somebody
like Mr. Frank Hellmer.
The Chairman. Thank you, Ranking Member Braun. I have maybe
two more questions. I do want to note for the hearing record,
as I said we have had several Senators in and out to ask
question. We also had Senators who were here and could not
remain but were here for the hearing. That was Senator Rick
Scott, who was here, as well as Senator Blumenthal.
I know that we are a little bit short on time but a note
for the record, as well, that the number of employers across
the country who are still in the subminimum wage category is
coming down. Just looking at some of the numbers, just since
2015, when we had a little more than 2,500 employers across the
country, we are now down below 1,000, to the most recent number
I have is 834, so that number is coming down. More and more
employers realizing that you can employ people with
disabilities and not only give them an opportunity but also
give your company any opportunity to grow and to thrive.
I wanted to ask Ms. Willman about a related tax issue. You
indicated that from adding Braille to your machines and
products to modifying work schedules to suit your employees'
needs you have put significant effort into accessibility. As we
transition toward a more inclusive workforce that welcomes
disability's part of diversity, it is important that businesses
and business owners are supported, that they have some help
doing that.
My legislation, the Disability Employment Incentive Act,
would help ease that transition by expanding tax benefits,
meaning existing tax benefits, including the work opportunity
tax credit, to support companies and nonprofits that hire and
retain people with disabilities.
Ms. Willman, I ask you, how would expanding tax benefits
for business owners like you help provide the resources to make
your business even more successful?
Ms. Willman. It would allow not only my business but other
businesses the opportunity to have more access to equipment
that will make areas more accessible. I mean when we first got
our first brailler it was quite pricey. I mean, at first we
typed it all out by hand, but then we got the brailler and so
things quickly sped up from there.
Throughout the years we have machines so that employees,
who are visually impaired, they can still know when the machine
is active. There are sensors around the room. We make
everyone's workstation accessible to them.
If you add the tax onto it, that incentivizes other
companies to do the same, so this way all workforces can have
disabled employees. They just need to do the research and find
out what their employees need and the extra revenue that you
would be getting, it would make it more accessible for them as
well to make it accessible for their employees.
The Chairman. Well thank you very much for the perspective
you have as an employer.
My last question is for Dr. Avellone. The definition of
competitive integrated employment was put into statute recently
as part of--well, not quite recently but 10 years ago--as part
of the 2014 Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act. In your
testimony you talked about the importance of this definition
and the positive impact that it had for people with
disabilities and employers in your community. Your work
demonstrates that nobody is too disabled to work in competitive
integrated employment or to deserve fair wages for their work.
Can you talk about the importance of the current definition
of competitive integrated employment and share some examples
from your work that demonstrate its impact on people with
disabilities?
Dr. Avellone. Yes. Thank you. I think one of the most
important parts about the current definition is that it focuses
beyond simply achieving a job, and it looks more
comprehensively at achieving quality employment outcomes, so
that includes part-or full-time work as a preference of the
individual. It also focuses on integration over segregation. It
also looks at equality, both in pay and benefits, and it also
examines upward mobility so that we don't have individuals with
disabilities staying in the same entry-level positions for
their entire employment term.
Essentially, to the individuals that I work with, that
definition allows them access to the same type of employment
any other American without a disability would have.
I mentioned in my testimony several success stories of
people that I have worked with, and the definition of CIE, or
competitive integrated employment, allows them to be impacted
in ways that are highly beneficial, both personally for them
but also for everyone around them. The level of integration,
quality, and upward mobility has resulted in, for those
individuals in my testimony who work in critical care and other
areas of hospitals that are essential for that hospital, it
gives them a sense of pride, it gives the patients in the
hospital better services, it makes the hospital more efficient,
and for their parents it gives them a sense of comfort knowing
that they have a sense of community around their child.
The elements that comprise that definition lead to wide-
reaching benefits for not only those employed but those in
their circles around them.
The Chairman. Thanks very much, Doctor. I will turn to
close out our hearing, unless, Senator Braun, do you have any
other questions you wanted to ask?
Senator Braun. I am good on questions.
The Chairman. Okay. Well, thanks very much, everyone. I
want to start by, of course, thanking our witnesses for their
testimony. We always have interesting, informative testimony in
this hearing, and we had that today, but not too infrequently,
and today is one of those days we have testimony that is both
interesting and informative but also inspiring, and I want to
thank all of you for providing that kind of inspiring
testimony.
Today's hearing highlighted policy solutions for successful
employment outcomes for people with disabilities, especially
those with higher support needs. When we are intentional about
taking a person-centered approach people with all kinds of
disabilities can work in a competitive, integrated employment.
It is shameful that some people with disabilities are being
paid subminimum wage.
Thankfully, phasing out this discriminatory wage is a
bipartisan priority. I am proud to work with Senators Daines
and Blackburn as well as Senator Van Hollen to make sure that
my Transformation to Competitive Integrated Employment Act
reflects that reality and that we work to pass that into law. I
invite any of my colleagues in the Senate and members of the
Committee to join us in that effort.
I will continue to work to ensure that people with
disabilities have what they need to succeed in competitive
integrated employment. I look forward to working with this
Committee and our witnesses to improve the rate of disability
employment throughout the country.
I will turn next to Ranking Member Braun.
Senator Braun. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to
all the witnesses for sharing your inspiring stories and your
experiences. It is important that we recognize the progress
made in expanding opportunities for Americans with disabilities
who want to work, as employees or entrepreneurs. We should
address precise challenges in the workforce and exercise that
caution you need to make sure that you offer opportunity in a
broad array of areas. One size hardly ever fits all. We need to
preserve flexibility, freedom, and opportunity for all people
with disabilities to work where, when, and how they want, and
at a dignified wage.
I am encouraged by the positive trends in disability
employment and hope we can keep our focus on flexibility along
the way. Thank you again for all being here today.
The Chairman. Thank you, Ranking Member Braun. I want to
thank again our witnesses, Ms. Willman, Mr. Mittman, Mr.
Hellmer, and Dr. Avellone for your testimony and the expertise
you bring to this hearing record and this hearing today, and of
course, your own personal stories.
If any Senators have additional questions for the record or
statements to be added, the hearing record will be kept open
until Thursday, March 7th.
Thank you all for participating in this hearing. We are
adjourned.

?
=======================================================================
APPENDIX
=======================================================================
?
=======================================================================
Prepared Witness Statements
=======================================================================
?
U.S. Senate Special Committee on Aging
"All Means All: Empowering People with Disabilities to Thrive in
Careers and the Workplace"
February 29, 2024
Prepared Witness Statement
Erin Willman
Before I begin, I would like to thank Senator Casey,
Senator Braun, and all of the members of the Aging Committee
for inviting me to come down to this nation's great capital and
for having me here to speak on a subject that is very dear to
my heart.
When I lost my vision at the age of 15, I went through a
very familiar experience for many disabled teenagers. I started
to question what my future was going to look like.
As many young people do, I went looking for employment only
to be met with rejection time and time again due to the fact
that all people could see was my white cane and all of the
things I couldn't do, instead of the things I was capable of.
After all this time and all of the continuous rejections I
started to become discouraged. I was beginning to question what
my worth was.
After going to the Office of Vocational Rehabilitation I
was told that I would never be able to have competitive
employment.
Thankfully, I have a wonderful and supportive family. On a
particularly bad day my dad tried to cheer me up by playing a
game. It was a thought experiment on what I would do if I could
create a job, since I couldn't find one. We had come up with a
coffee business. My reasoning at the time was that coffee is
something that is known to bring people together, so why not
use that to bring both able-bodied and disabled people
together.
We kept talking about it for days until we realized we
could create a business like the one we imagined, we named it
White Cane Coffee. From that very first discussion we knew we
wanted to do two things with the company. Firstly, we wanted to
have Braille on all of our packaging. Secondly, I wanted to
hire other people with disabilities so that they could have the
same opportunity for competitive employment. I figured that if
I wasn't getting hired due to my disability, others in my
community might not have been faring much better. Now I knew at
the time a little bit about the sheltered workshops due to my
older brother working in one for a time when I was younger.
While working there he was only being paid $1.50 an hour, which
is not only much less than minimum wage in Pennsylvania but he
was also losing money due to the price of transit. He was also
not allowed to pack a hot lunch or use the microwave in the
kitchen and the able-bodied staff not only looked down on the
disabled employees but kept a cold distance from them. Needless
to say, he was my first employee.
Meanwhile at White Cane Coffee, our staff has full access
to warm meals and have always been treated with respect. Some
businesses treat their employees as liabilities while we treat
ours as assets. As my business grew from an online store to a
brick-and-mortar shop, I was able to hire more people with
disabilities. That growth has also given me the privilege to
speak with schools for the blind to discuss with the students
about their futures. I will never forget when we hired an
employee, we'll call Jay. He had also worked at a sheltered
workshop. When he came to us he said that he was willing to
work for $7.25 or less. The "or less" caught our attention.
Along the way in his life, someone had made him feel like he
was worth less. To this day I am deeply upset that he was made
to feel that way, but I also think of all of the other disabled
people in this country who are either going through such an
ordeal or already have. When we hired him, we made sure that he
knew that he had worth, he would be starting at $9 an hour, and
we couldn't wait to see him come in on Monday. He has been an
incredible employee since that day. No matter what he is always
on time, even when he has to walk in terrible weather. He also
has risen in our business and is now a team leader and is
teaching other employees.
All of this because someone believed in him. I've noticed
the same loyalty and drive in all of my employees. I've never
before heard a group of people speak so enthusiastically about
their jobs and being able to tell their families what they have
been doing at work.
Since opening our company, we have won numerous ethical
employment awards due to the fact that we treated people like
people. If one small coffee manufacturing company in
Pennsylvania can achieve such success, then there's no reason
for larger companies to not do the same. Even making smaller
changes to adapt the workplace increases productivity and
morale while also lowering employee turnover. The rhetoric that
people don't want to work anymore is simply untrue. People want
to work, they just want to be treated and paid what they
deserve.
I have always said that if you change one life you change
the world. By passing the Transformation to Competitive
Employment Act you will be changing countless lives, so I
implore you all, change the world.
U.S. Senate Special Committee on Aging
"All Means All: Empowering People with Disabilities to Thrive in
Careers and the Workplace"
February 29, 2024
Prepared Witness Statement
Jeffrey E. Mittman
Thank you, Chairman Casey, Ranking Member Braun, and the
Committee for allowing me to testify today.
My name is Jeffrey Mittman, and I am the president & CEO of
Bosma Enterprises in Indianapolis, IN. Bosma is a nonprofit
social enterprise that is the largest employer of Hoosiers who
are blind and the sole comprehensive provider of blind
rehabilitation services in Indiana. Bosma employs nearly 200
people, and over half are blind. We have employees who are
blind at all levels of our company.
In 2005, I served in the US Army deployed to Iraq. While in
a convoy with some of my Iraqi counterparts, an IED exploded. I
was critically injured, and I lost my eyesight. After years of
recovery, I eventually returned to work. I restarted my career
at the National Industries for the Blind. Here, I was
introduced to the AbilityOne Program and the employment it
provides to nearly 40,000 Americans with disabilities. After
NIB, I began to work at the Defense Finance and Accounting
Service in Indianapolis. During this time, I became a member of
the Board of Directors at Bosma Enterprises and was eventually
appointed the president and CEO.
Employment is the backbone of our society. It allows people
to live independently and support their families. Across the
country, 60 to 70 percent of people with a disability are not
employed. This is not because they do not want to work or are
incapable, but because of the lack of comprehensive training
services giving individuals the skills needed or opportunity
and support from employers once they find a job.
The federal AbilityOne Program is designed to create
employment opportunities for people with disabilities. It
leverages the procurement of needed goods and services for the
government to create employment at a fair market price. There
is a network of nearly 500 nonprofit agencies nationwide. At
one of those AbilityOne-affiliated agencies, an employee who
was blind produced the combat helmet that saved my life.
Bosma Enterprises is the primary provider of exam and
surgical gloves to the Department of Veteran Affairs through
AbilityOne. Over 50% of our workforce is visually impaired and
employed at all levels of the company and are paid competitive
wages and benefits. The employees are proud to serve our
nation's veterans and were essential to their protection during
the pandemic. Bosma is an employer of choice, as evidenced by
our low turnover rate and high employee satisfaction ratings.
Our mission is to create opportunities for people who are
blind, but it is a work environment where its employees can
thrive and have room to advance if they choose.
In addition to employment, Bosma offers statewide blind
rehabilitation and training. We came to offer these programs
because the state of Indiana asked to transition them to us as
they saw our success in employing individuals who are blind.
These programs operate at a deficit; however, this public-
private partnership thrives because of the AbilityOne Program,
Indiana's support, and donors' generosity.
As part of our rehabilitation services, we also have a
dedicated team that assists individuals with vision loss to
find employment outside our organization. Everyone should have
a choice of where they want to work. Just as employment is the
backbone of society, individualism and choice are paramount to
our freedom as Americans.
Unfortunately, people who are blind are facing challenges
to that freedom. The government has severely limited or
eliminated AbilityOne agencies as potential choices for
employment because they don t fit into their outdated
definition of competitive integrated employment. This limits
employment and creates a stigma that people who have
disabilities working alongside disabled colleagues do not have
value. We would never tell wounded warriors they can't work
with other wounded warriors, but that is precisely what
government agencies are doing when trying to tell a person they
can't work someplace that employs people with disabilities. As
I have described, Bosma has blind employees working in various
positions throughout the company, including 15 leaders with
vision loss. All employees are offered opportunities for cross-
training, upward mobility, and provided assistance if they want
to seek employment elsewhere.
Bosma Enterprises is a perfect example of how a public-
private partnership can work to serve people with disabilities
by providing the dignity of work, competitive pay and benefits,
and turning tax takers into taxpayers.
Thank you again for this opportunity.
U.S. Senate Special Committee on Aging
"All Means All: Empowering People with Disabilities to Thrive in
Careers and the Workplace"
February 29, 2024
Prepared Witness Statement
Frank Hellmer
Hello everyone. My name is Frank Hellmer, and I would like
to start off by thanking you all for having me here to testify
before the Senate Aging Committee concerning my experience with
subminimum wage workshops and competitive integrated
employment. I am honored and thankful to you all for this
opportunity. I am a person with autism who has worked hard and
has been blessed with a good job, currently as a Data Analyst
at a major health insurer called Centene Corporation. Centene,
in my experience, has one of the most inclusive hiring
processes I have ever seen, going above and beyond the letter
of the Americans with Disabilities Act to embody the spirit of
disability employment. I am testifying today on my own
initiative, and do not represent Centene or claim Centene's
endorsement for being here.
Two things I like about my job are having supportive
coworkers as well as work that challenges my mind in a way
similar to puzzles. I develop and run SQL scripts, a type of
software code, to extract data from databases and send it to
its stakeholders. I enjoy it when I get to learn a new trick or
new way to do something with my programming skills.
One thing that makes my job accessible is a flexible work
schedule, where as long as I am getting stuff done and
producing results, they are not too concerned about strict
hours. I also work from home, which is helpful for when things
get frustrating at work, so I can be as expressive as I want to
be and no one at work has to know about it. The flexible
schedule also helps me to be able to go to the grocery store
with my home and community-based Waiver staff during the day
and then come back and make up those hours later in the day or
later in the week as well.
Being able to earn good wages has enabled me to obtain my
own apartment, go back to school to finish my master's in
health informatics, purchase a gaming computer, Nintendo
Switch, and Xbox Series S, among numerous other blessings. In
my free time, I like to play classic computer games like Doom
and Quake due to the multitude of user-made mods and content
available for them.
I am able to work in competitive integrated employment
because Arkansas has a somewhat unusual program called Workers
with Disabilities Medicaid. I am a beneficiary of the Community
and Employment Supports (CES) Waiver program, which has a 10-
year waitlist. Normally a person receiving SSI benefits cannot
earn more than three times the monthly SSI rate per month
without losing their Medicaid Waiver eligibility. However, the
Arkansas Workers with Disabilities Medicaid program overrides
the limitation so that you can earn as much as you want and
still maintain your Waiver services. With my increased wages, I
am able to buy better groceries and stuff that I like, which
are mainly electronics and video games. I am also able to save
for the future and for retirement as well.
In May 2016, I graduated from Arkansas Tech University with
a 3.9 GPA and a double major in Accounting and Business Data
Analytics. I was able to get through college in large part due
to very supportive faculty, who looked out for me. I also met
my best friend Pastor Miller there, who preaches at Glen Rose
Missionary Baptist Church, where I still attend today. He made
me feel welcome and included me on field trips for professional
organizations, like the Society for Human Resource Management
conference.
In December 2016, I passed the CPA exam, and in 2017 I
started an internship to obtain my CPA experience hours.
Unfortunately, pushing for all these goals left little time for
me to properly process my grief over my mother's passing from
cancer in 2015, and so I mentally broke down in 2018, halting
the internship for over a year while I recovered in various
institutions before finally being able to get fast-tracked onto
a community and employment supports Waiver. I am especially
thankful to my friends who continued to believe in me during
this dark time and moved mountains to ensure I had the
resources and care I needed to recover. Most people would have
given up on me.
In 2019, I started working in a subminimum wage workshop.
In the workshop, I worked 30 hours per week and made between
$30-120 every two weeks. At the workshop, I worked in a wash
bay, washing cars and machinery. I one time spent an hour
inside a car wiping windows and seats on a hot summer day. In
the middle of 2019, the workshop had a rate adjustment, and our
wages started to go down. By October 2019, when I got a $35
check for working 30 hours per week for two weeks, I quit
because the work made me feel exploited.
After quitting the workshop, I went back to try and finish
my internship, which I had started back in 2017. After a couple
of months back at the internship, in January 2020, a job
opportunity came open at Centene, which my financial guardian
alerted me to. I applied for it, went through the interview
process, and am happily working there today. My four-year
anniversary will be in May 2024. Thank you all.
U.S. Senate Special Committee on Aging
"All Means All: Empowering People with Disabilities to Thrive in
Careers and the Workplace"
February 29, 2024
Prepared Witness Statement
Dr. Lauren Avellone
Thank you, Chairman Casey, Ranking Member Braun, and
members of the U.S. Senate Special Committee on Aging, for
inquiring about a topic that I feel deserves renewed attention
and pressing changes. My perspective is an aggregate of my
experiences working in multiple professional settings. I worked
in a sheltered workshop (now called work centers), which are
facilities that separately employ people with disabilities and
can obtain authorization to pay those individuals less than the
federal minimum wage. I have also worked as a direct service
provider in residential and hospital settings, and in a
university postsecondary education program. Currently, I am a
researcher in the area of disability and employment, but I also
provide local consultation on behavioral services for
transition-age youth in public schools and national
consultation on community-based employment supports. Therefore,
my position on the employment possibilities for people with
disabilities comes from my collective experiences serving in
multiple capacities. My views reflect the voices and insight of
those who I have met over the course of my career.
Importance of Competitive Integrated Employment
Employment is a major life activity for most adults. It is
estimated that Americans spend approximately one third of our
entire lives working. Employment provides a number of
advantages associated with an overall increased quality of life
(Lea & Meier, 2018). When a person is able to participate in
employment aligned with their personal skills and interests, it
can enhance a person's life through financial gains, access to
social circles, the establishment of structure and routine,
opportunities for personal growth, a sense of purpose, a chance
to contribute meaningfully to one's community, and the ability
to spend one's time in intrinsically rewarding ways. Not
surprisingly, research confirms this to be true for those with
even the most significant disabilities as well (Schall, et al.,
2020; Taylor, et al., 2022). Young adults with disabilities who
participate in competitive integrated employment show
significant growth in personal independence in several major
life areas. These include increases in home living, community
engagement, lifelong learning, health and safety,
socialization, and self-advocacy skills (Inge et al., in press
; Schall et al., 2020).
Current State of Employment for People with Disabilities
Unfortunately, Americans with disabilities participate in
the United States workforce at much lower rates than their
peers without disabilities. Only 40.5% of individuals with
disabilities were employed in January of 2024, and while this
is near historic highs, it is alarmingly low when compared to
the 77.3% of people employed without disabilities (Center for
Research on Disability, 2024). Individuals with disabilities
are not only less likely to be employed, but they are also more
likely to be working part-time rather than full-time, and
working in jobs below their potential (U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics, 2024). They also remain the only people in the U.S.
legally allowed to be paid below the federal minimum wage as a
condition of their employment through the issuance of 14c
certificates (U.S. Department of Labor, 2024). Put plainly,
people with disabilities are a massively underutilized group of
talented individuals, many of whom want to work and could
significantly contribute to our workforce.
Definition of Competitive Integrated Employment
I have spent the majority of my career assisting those with
the most significant support needs access education and
employment. These are individuals who are skilled and capable
people, but who also happen to need extra help in a variety of
areas of daily life. Such areas include but are not limited to
communication, socialization, personal independence, reduction
of challenging behaviors, and employment. These individuals are
at the highest risk of being excluded from work. Therefore, I
would like to be clear that when I say individuals with
disabilities should have greater opportunities for workforce
participation, I am including those with high support needs. I
would also like to be clear that when I refer to work, I am
referring to competitive integrated employment. The Workforce
Innovation and Opportunity Act of 2014 designates key features
of competitive integrated employment to be;
full or part-time work;
in an integrated setting among others who do not
have disabilities;
with pay at or above the federal minimum wage, and
comparable to that received by other employees doing similar
work with similar experience and credentialing,
offering similar benefits as those received by other
employees in similar positions; and
includes opportunities for advancement similar to
peers without disabilities in similar positions (WIOA, 2014)
In essence, I am referring to the same type of work any
American without a disability would pursue, not work in
segregated settings or those that pay below the federal
minimum. The original purpose of the 14c certificate, made
possible under the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, was made
in good faith. It was intended to enable individuals with
disabilities and returning veterans from war an opportunity to
obtain work, but at reduced compensation (U.S. Commission on
Civil Rights, 2020). However, we know substantially more today
than we did in the 1930s about how to effectively serve
individuals with disabilities, including those with the most
significant disabilities. Findings from a report by the U.S.
Commission on Civil Rights in 2020 found that the general
profile of individuals receiving subminimum wages did not
differ from those with the same disabilities earning
competitive wages in integrated settings (U.S.
Commission on Civil Rights, 2020). This finding is not
surprising to the many of us regularly using the evidenced-
based practices that help individuals with higher support needs
access competitive integrated work.
Evidenced-Based Pathways to Employment
We now have over 40 years of research identifying evidence-
based practices that lead to competitive integrated employment
outcomes for those with even the highest needs (Wehman, 2023).
These interventions include, but are not limited to supported-
employment, customized employment, inclusive postsecondary
education programs, and transition-to-employment internship
models (Avellone et al., 2021; 2023; Inge et al., in press ;
Wehman et al., 2017; Wehman, 2023). These interventions all
share several critical characteristics that make them
particularly effective.
All adhere to a place-then-train approach which
encompasses placing an individual in a job and then installing
the proper supports needed to help them be successful. This
approach negates the need for spending time in preparatory
activities prior to beginning work.
A job coach or other employment support staff serves
as a facilitator, advocate and liaison between the business and
the individual with a disability during the entire employment
process.
Supports are individualized to meet the personal
needs of each person with a disability. There is not a one-
size-fits-all approach.
All involved, which includes the person with a
disability, employment support staff, businesses and sometimes
educators work collaboratively to think outside the box and
identify how an individual job seeker's strengths, interests
and preferences can be aligned with the needs of a business.
The needs of a business are given equal
consideration to those of the job seeker with a disability
resulting in a good job match that is mutually advantageous for
both the person with a disability and the employer.
There is an antiquated view that a person who has high
support needs who wants to work, can't work. This view often
showcases the many ways a person might struggle to job search,
interview, onboard, learn the job once employed, and to do what
is necessary to keep the job long-term. Simply put, that isn't
t how the evidenced-based practices used to successfully
transition a person to employment operate. Rather, the
evidenced-based practices shown to be effective for people with
significant support needs require more flexible approaches,
creativity and different ways of thinking on the part of all
involved.
This is the case for A.J. and Damien, two autistic
individuals with significant support needs who work at a large
hospital in the Richmond area. Both work in jobs that add true
value to their employer and the mission to serve their
patients.
A.J. works to ensure that special carts containing gowns,
gloves, masks and other protective equipment are fully stocked
throughout the hospital. Before he was hired, these carts were
often depleted of needed supplies during the day. The hospital
was found deficient in this area on their accreditation review.
As a result, they decided to create a position that involved
these tasks and hire A.J. to do the work. His dedication and
attention to detail make him a model employee, but more
importantly, his efforts make co-workers and patients safer by
ensuring they have necessary protective equipment.
Damien works in the hospital pharmacy where he ensures
that all medications are stored properly. He also removes out-
of-date medication. In addition, he is responsible for
delivering chemotherapy medicines to the outpatient infusion
center in the hospital. These were jobs that previously had to
be done by the pharmacists and pharmacy techs when they had the
time. The problem was that these employees never had the time
and so these tasks were not getting done as needed. Because of
Damien's work, the hospital has been able to decrease the
number of incidents of medication errors and reduce the wait
time experienced by chemotherapy patients.
If you were to meet these young men, you might think their
disability would make work like this too difficult for them.
However, they possess significant strengths that when aligned
with the needs of the business resulted in highly beneficial
outcomes for A.J., Damien, and the hospital. It should be a
national priority to create changes that enable more
individuals like the ones showcased here opportunities to
secure competitive integrated employment.
Recommendations for Change
Given that we have known about effective strategies to
increase employment outcomes for nearly four decades, how is it
that we still manage to see persistently low employment rates
for people with disabilities? Based on a combination of the
research conducted at the Rehabilitation Research and Training
Center at Virginia Commonwealth University in the area of
disability and employment, and my clinical experience working
with service provider agencies, I can identify a number of
factors that consistently act as barriers to competitive
integrated employment for people with disabilities. It is
difficult to see how the needle will be moved if these areas
are not addressed in the future. They include:
Increasing specialized transportation options
Professionalizing the role of employment support
providers
Funding long-term supports
Increasing work-based learning opportunities for
youth and young adults
Increasing funding for Inclusive Postsecondary
Education Programs
Addressing concerns about keeping disability
benefits while working
Eliminating 14c certificates that enable workers
with disabilities
to be paid less than the federal minimum wage
One of the most commonly cited impediments to competitive
integrated employment for people with disabilities is
transportation (Sabella & Bezyak, 2020). I have heard
repeatedly from service providers that getting a person with
significant support needs a job is often not the problem.
Rather, it is finding a way to get them to and from that job
that results in the inability for them to secure or retain that
position. While transportation is a pervasive issue for many
people with disabilities, and frankly many American workers
without disabilities, it presents a particular challenge for
individuals with high support needs. These are often job
seekers who do not, and will not, have a license or personal
vehicle to help them get to work. A lack of transportation
inhibits their ability to become employed. This often unfairly
places the burden of transportation on the families of people
with disabilities and discourages those with economic
challenges from opting to pursue work, the very economic
opportunity that could better their circumstances.
There is also a need to professionalize the role of the
employment specialist (Ham, et al., 2023). There is a research-
to-practice gap when it comes to implementation of evidenced-
based practices. In controlled research settings, where
interventions such as supported and customized employment are
provided, we see high rates of employment outcomes for those
with high support needs ranging from 60% to 90% (Avellone et
al., 2023; Wehman et al., 2017; 2019). In applied settings
outside of the research context, we don t see the same
impressive outcomes. There are no nation-wide credentials
required for the role that ensure providers are trained in a
minimum number of competencies necessary to provide effective
employment supports. Further, this lack of professionalization
results in service providers unfairly being asked to perform
above their level of training and skillset, which leads to
unnecessary stress and high turnover.
There is a need to fund long-term supports to ensure job
retention (Brooke, et al., 2018). While growth and independence
will occur on-the-job as a person becomes comfortable, natural
supports within the workplace are not enough to ensure long-
term success. A person with significant support needs is likely
to require periodic check-ins from a service provider to ensure
their employment is going smoothly. Changes occur in every
workplace over time. A person with significant support needs
may require specialized assistance adjusting to changes in
supervisors, protocols, the physical workspace, or supplies.
This support needs to be addressed by a highly trained
employment service provider who understands evidenced-based
strategies. Some states have addressed this need with state-
level funding by ensuring there is a smooth transition from
Vocational Rehabilitation Services to Home and Community-Based
Medicaid Waiver Services, but these states are the exception
and not the rule (Friedman & Rizzolo, 2017). Instead, my
colleagues and I have seen an individual's successful
employment become at risk due to a lack of long-term support.
There is a need to increase work-based learning
opportunities. Participation in paid work during high school is
a significant predictor of obtaining competitive integrated
employment after leaving high school (Avellone, et al., 2023;
Carter et al., 2012; Wehman et al., 2015; Roux et al., 2015).
Nothing prepares a transition-age youth for becoming employed
as a young adult better than spending actual time immersed in a
work setting performing real job duties for an employer. Work-
based learning experiences allow a young adult to engage in job
exploration, develop marketable skills, establish a resume and
references, and build a network of professionals who can
connect the person to future job opportunities (Wehman et al.,
2019). This positions the youth to be better prepared for
immediately entering the workforce. In my research, work-based
learning experiences are the least likely received pre-
employment transition service specified in The Workforce
Innovation and Opportunity Act of 2014 (Avellone et al., 2024).
There is a need for funding to increase access to inclusive
postsecondary education programs for students with intellectual
and developmental disabilities (Avellone, et al., 2021). These
programs provide specialized college experiences for students
that enable them to receive advanced academic and applied work
training in a specific area of interest. Grant funded
demonstration projects have sometimes covered tuition. However,
as these models move to be sustainable without that level of
financial assistance, the burden of cost falls on families
which makes this option out of reach for many young adults with
intellectual and developmental disabilities who would like to
receive postsecondary training. Contributions from Vocational
Rehabilitation and private donors have helped cover tuition
costs but these resources are limited and inconsistent.
While this is not my area of expertise, I have heard from
many individuals and families about their concerns regarding
obtaining employment or working additional hours due to fears
that it will place receipt of their disability benefits at risk
(Olney & Lyle, 2021). I have also heard from affected parties
that as states raise their minimum wage rates this has created
more concern about the impact of work on maintaining benefits.
I recommend the Committee seek expert guidance on this matter.
Lastly, it is time to end the practice of paying people
with disabilities subminimum wages through the use of 14c
certificates. This practice falsely communicates that people
with disabilities are not capable or competent enough to
perform high quality work among the rest of society. It also
erroneously assumes that their work isn't worth as much as the
work of other Americans without disabilities. These views are
misaligned with what we know from extensive research and
success stories of those with even the highest support needs
who have entered competitive integrated employment and
contribute meaningfully in their communities every day.
Conclusion
I believe that addressing the issues outlined in this
statement will significantly enhance the unnecessarily poor
employment outcomes currently experienced by Americans with
disabilities. Addressing each of these areas will provide
Americans with disabilities, particularly those with the most
significant support needs, more choice over the services they
can access and the future they want to hold. It is my position
that nearly anyone who wants to work, can work, regardless of
the type or severity of their disability. It is time we stop
thinking dichotomously about who can work, and who cannot work,
and instead be thinking about what we can do to help all people
with the desire to work to become employed. A person with
higher support needs may require more time and resources in
order to gain access to competitive integrated employment, but
it is possible and we have seen it done through flexible
approaches and individualized supports.
The evidenced-based methods used to successfully employ
those with significant support needs also considers the unique
needs of businesses which results in an advantageous
arrangement for all parties. In a post-pandemic world, the
employment landscape has changed dramatically. Not only are
employers more in need of reliable and motivated workers than
ever before, but they have also become more accustomed to
making accommodations like offering telework options, shift
changes, and redistribution of tasks to employees. These are
the sorts of accommodations that already greatly benefit
individuals with disabilities. Therefore, it is a particularly
optimal time for change. As we look to the future, I hope to
see employment outcomes for all individuals with disabilities
greatly improved. Not only in terms of simply becoming
employed, but also in terms of higher quality employment
outcomes that reflect higher wages, more full-time employment,
long-term job retention, greater access to fringe benefits,
more advancement and upward mobility, and the securement of
more diverse jobs in a variety of industries.
Before I close, I would like to tell you about the meaning
of work in the life of Charlie and Stefanie. Both secured
competitive integrated employment as a result of their
participation in a work-based learning internship program.
Charlie is a surgical technician in a progressive surgical
bariatric unit also at a local hospital in the Metro Richmond
area. Charlie's dad, Charles Sr. reflects on his son's
accomplishments:
"While he still has his ups & downs Charlie is
thriving... and he just got a raise. He also just got nominated
for an award at work. He seems to be really doing good and that
means a lot. If something ever does happen to me, he'll have a
house to live in. He'll have to have someone to help him out
but he'll have a place to live, he's GOT A JOB, and he'll be
okay! That means a lot, it really does. You want your children
to do good and when they have special needs it makes it even
more challenging, but he'll be okay- he really will."
Stefanie is a young autistic woman who needs support
communicating with others. After spending her senior year in
high school at a specialized program in Richmond Virginia
called Project SEARCH plus ASD Supports, Stefanie got a job as
a technician in the endoscopy unit at a large Metro Richmond
hospital. She sanitizes and resets patient bays, sets up
patient belonging bags, and stocks each bay with clean sheets
and blankets. Before being hired, the nurse manager couldn't
imagine a person with Stefanie's type of support needs working
for her because she was worried they wouldn't be able to handle
the demands of the job. Now, she says:
"Within a week of having Stefanie intern in our
department, we knew we had to hire her. She brings a sense of
life and humility to what we do every day. It's hard not to
smile when Stefanie is at work!"
Stefanie's mom Donna sent this email on the day she was
offered a job to Stefanie's employment specialist:
"I spent all yesterday afternoon alternating between
weepy and a big smile on my face...there aren't words to say
how much I appreciate what all of you have done to get us to
one of the proudest days in our lives...once Stefanie figured
out that I was crying because I was so happy she became so
excited to understand that she HAS A JOB! And each time she
told someone it got louder and prouder-I GOT A JOB! We all want
to be around people that value us for who we are and appreciate
the work we do... Thank you for pushing for this particular
internship. I believe she has truly found people who see her
just as I do- an incredibly hard worker whose very presence
does indeed make it a happier place to be...again there are no
words for how that feels."
For Charlie, Stefanie, AJ, and Damien, their jobs give them
purpose and meaning. Their employers value them for what they
bring to the workplace and they contribute greatly to their
communities. They are known as competent workers. To date, they
have all been employed for over 10 years. Without them working,
the morale of their units would be lower, the quality of care
given to patients would be lower, and the worry their parents
hold over their futures would be higher.
Thank you for the opportunity to share.
References
Avellone, L., Camden, J., Taylor, J., & Wehman, P. (2021).
Employment outcomes for students with intellectual disabilities
in postsecondary education programs: A scoping review. Journal
of Postsecondary Education and Disability, 34(3), 223-238.
Avellone, L., Taylor, J., Ham, W., Schall, C., Wehman, P.,
Brooke, V., & Strauser, D. (2023). A scoping review on
internship programs and employment outcomes for youth and young
adults with intellectual and developmental disabilities.
Rehabilitation Counselors and Educators Journal, 12(1). https:/
/doi.org/10.52017/001c.38785
Avellone, L., Taylor, J., Whittenburg, H., Park, S.,
Poppen, M., Castruita-Rios, Y., & Tansey, T. (;
Manuscript in preparation). National summary of pre-employment
transition services for youth and young adults with
disabilities.
Brooke, V., Brooke, A.M., Schall, C., Wehman, P.,
McDonough, J., Thompson, K., & Smith, J. (2018). Employees with
autism spectrum disorder achieving long-term employment
success: A retrospective review of employment retention and
intervention. Research and Practice for Persons with Severe
Disabilities, 43(3), 181-193. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1540796918783202
Carter, E. W., Austin, D., & Trainor, A. A. (2012).
Predictors of post school employment outcomes for young adults
with severe disabilities. Journal of Disability Policy Studies,
23(1), 50 63. https://doi.org/ 10.1177/1044207311414680 Center
for Research on Disability. (2024). nTIDE January 2024 Jobs
Report: Despite minor shifts, employment for people with
disabilities remains near historic highs. https://
www.researchondisability.org/season-9-episode-2-
222024#ntidereport
Friedman, C. & Rizzolo, M. C. (2017). Get us real jobs:
Supported employment services for people with intellectual and
developmental disabilities in Medicaid Home and Community Based
Services Waivers. Journal of Vocational Rehabilitation, 46(1)
107-116. https://doi.org/10.3233/JVR-160847
Ham, W., Schall, C., & Avellone, L. (2023). A scoping
review of the competencies and training of employment
specialists supporting individuals with intellectual and
developmental disabilities. Inclusion, 10(4), 297-313. https://
doi.org/10.1352/2326-6988-10.4.297
Inge, K., Avellone, L., Wehman, P., Broda, M., & Joy, J.
(in press ). Effects of customized employment on the
independence of youth with intellectual and developmental
disabilities. Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities.
Inge, K., Wehman, P., Avellone, L., Broda, M., & McDonough
(in press ). the impact of customized employment on the
competitive integrated employment outcomes of transition age
youth with intellectual and developmental disabilities: A
random control trial study. Work.
Lea, C. & Meier, S. (2018). Nonmonetary incentives and the
implications of work as a source of meaning. Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 32(3): 215-38. https://doi.org/10.1257/
jep.32.3.215
Olney, M. F., & Lyle, C. (2011). The benefits trap:
Barriers to employment experienced by SSA beneficiaries.
Rehabilitation Counseling Bulletin, 54(4), 197-209. https://
doi.org/10.1177/0034355211400209
Roux, A. M., Shattuck, P. T., Rast, J. E., Rava, J. A., &
Anderson, K. (2015). National autism indicators report:
Transition into young adulthood. https://drexel.edu//media/
Files/autismoutcomes/publications/
National%20Autism%20Indicators%20Report%20-%20July%202015.ashx
Sabella, S. A. & Bezyak, J. L., (2020). Barriers to public
transportation and employment: A national survey of individuals
with disabilities. Journal of Applied Rehabilitation
Counseling, 30(3) 174-185. https://doi.org/10.1891/0047-
2220.50.3.174
Schall, C., Sima, A. P., Avellone, L. Wehman, P.,
McDonough, J., & Brown, A. (2020) The effect of business
internships model and employment on enhancing the independence
of young adults with significant impact from autism.
Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities, 58(4), 301-313.
https://doi.org/10.1352/1934-9556-58.4.301
Taylor, J., Avellone, L, Brooke, V., Wehman, P., Inge, K.,
Schall, C., & Iwanaga, K. (2022). The impact of competitive
integrated employment on economic, psychological, and physical
health outcomes for individuals with intellectual and
developmental disabilities, Journal of Applied Research in
Intellectual Disabilities, 35, 448-459. https://doi.org/
10.1111/jar.12974 U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2024).
Persons with a Disability: Labor Force Characteristics 2023.
https://www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/disabl.pdf
U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. (2020). Subminimum Wages:
Impacts on the Civil Rights of People with Disabilities.
https://www.usccr.gov/files/2020/2020-09-17-Subminimum-Wages-
Report.pdf U.S. Department of Labor. (2024). 14c Certificate
Holders. https://www.dol.gov/agencies/whd/workers-with-
disabilities/section-14c/certificate-holders
Wehman, P. (2023). Supported employment and customized
employment: How effective are these interventions and what has
been their impact on the field?. Journal of Vocational
Rehabilitation, 58, 237-247.
Wehman, P., Schall, C., McDonough, J., Graham, C., Brooke,
V., Riehle, J. E., Brooke, A., Ham, W., Lau, S., Allen, J., &
Avellone, L. (2017). Effects of an employer-based intervention
on employment outcomes for youth with significant support needs
due to autism. Autism, 21, 276-290. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1362361316635826
Wehman, P., Schall, C., McDonough, J., Sima, A., Brooke, A,
Ham, W., Whittenburg, H., Brooke, V., Avellone, L., & Reihle,
E. (2019). Competitive employment for transition-aged youth
with significant impact from autism: A multi-site randomized
clinical trial. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders,
50(6), 1822-1897. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-019-03940-2
Wehman, P., Sima, A. P., Ketchum, J., West, M. D., Chan,
F., & Luecking, R. (2015). Predictors of successful transition
from school to employment for youth with disabilities. Journal
of Occupational Rehabilitation, 25(2), 323 334. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10926-014-9 541-6 Workforce Innovation and
Opportunity Act of 2014, Pub. L. No. 113 128. (2014).
?
=======================================================================
Questions for the Record
=======================================================================
?
U.S. Senate Special Committee on Aging
"All Means All: Empowering People with Disabilities to Thrive in
Careers and the Workplace"
February 29, 2024
Questions for the Record
Erin Willman
Senator Kirsten Gillibrand
Question:
Employment opportunities are an important part in
independent living for people living with a disability. The
Transformation to Competitive Integrated Employment Act which I
cosponsor would support employment for people with disabilities
in competitive integrated jobs with the services and supports
necessary to recognize their skills, knowledge and experiences.
How would employer accommodations for blindness benefit
your employment opportunities?
Response:
Senator Gillibrand, thank you for this important question.
We have found that simple and inexpensive accommodations made
for our visually impaired (blind) employees has not only
strengthened our company but has reduced turnover
exponentially. With what appears to be a serious labor shortage
in this country, we are now being approached by other companies
and manufacturers on how we modify our workspaces for our
employees. Our goal has been and will continue to be; providing
secure gainful employment for the blind and disabled.
U.S. Senate Special Committee on Aging
"All Means All: Empowering People with Disabilities to Thrive in
Careers and the Workplace"
February 29, 2024
Questions for the Record
Frank Hellmer
Senator Kirsten Gillibrand
Question:
The Disability Employment Incentive Act which I cosponsor
would help encourage employers to hire and retain employees
with disabilities by enhancing three existing tax benefits.
People with a disability should have a variety of choices when
applying to jobs, and the intent of this bill is to expand
these options.
Have you faced physical barriers during your employment
history? How would a bill supporting employers' removal of
physical barriers improve your employment experience?
Response:
I myself haven't faced physical barriers, as I am
ambulatory and am able to walk and everything. However, if we
include a lack of transportation in the definition of physical
barriers, then more employers implementing virtual interviews
such as Zoom and Work from Home options where feasible would go
a long way to improve the hiring and employment experience of
people with disabilities. This is especially true in an era
where there's such a shortage of direct care staff due to that
profession's low pay.
Question:
The Raise the Wage Act of 2023 which I cosponsor would
gradually increase the minimum wage to 17 dollars per hour by
2029. This bill would also end the ability for employers to pay
people with a disability subminimum wages. This provides
workers with disabilities the opportunity to be competitively
employed and participate more fully in their communities.
How would making a livable wage as a young professional
have changed your current employment opportunities as an adult?
Response:
A living minimum wage would have changed my current
employment opportunities by enabling more people to enter the
direct care staff profession, enabling them to have a living
wage while caring for people with disabilities, thus helping
alleviate the transportation issue for people with disabilities
who want to work. As for me personally, it would have enabled
me to save earlier for retirement and other financial goals and
enabled me to get off of SSI (Supplemental Security Income)
sooner. It would also enable businesses to obtain a more fair
market value for their services, enabling them to hire more
people. For example, at the sub-minimum workshop I worked at,
two people would be assigned to wash a car, manually, and
inside and out. Each car washer would get $10 per car, and it
would normally take an hour for two people to wash the car.
Most of the cars belonged to the sub-minimum wage workshop's
parent company or to staff of said parent company. If the sub-
minimum wage workshop wasn't there, the organization would have
potentially had to have gone to an ordinary car wash and pay a
fair market rate for their vehicles to be cleaned.
U.S. Senate Special Committee on Aging
"All Means All: Empowering People with Disabilities to Thrive in
Careers and the Workplace"
February 29, 2024
Questions for the Record
Dr. Lauren Avellone
Senator Kirsten Gillibrand
Question:
Employment opportunities are an important part in
independent living for people living with a disability. The
Transformation to Competitive Integrated Employment Act which I
cosponsor would support employment for people with disabilities
in competitive integrated jobs with the services and supports
necessary to recognize their skills, knowledge and experiences.
How does transforming to competitive integrated employment
improve retention for a person with support needs?
Response:
The transformation from subminimum wage and sheltered work
options to competitive integrated employment (CIE) will greatly
improve quality of life for people with disabilities,
particularly those with complex support needs. Sheltered work
settings (also called work centers and facility-based
employment) do not provide the same enrichments as CIE.
Participation in CIE leads to greater financial independence, a
sense of purpose, a wider social circle, and opportunities for
personal growth. Research demonstrates that even individuals
with high support needs and limited-to-no prior work history
can become successfully employed within their communities
(Wehman, 2023). While participating in CIE, these individuals
show significant increases in learned employment skills as they
figure out new ways to rise to the challenges of being in a
dynamic and stimulating environment (Wehman et al., 2017;
Wehman et al., 2019). Not only do these individuals learn to
excel in their employment positions, but they also experience
substantial gains in other important life domains. Findings
from two randomized clinical trials conducted at Virginia
Commonwealth University found that participants with high
support needs who participated in CIE showed significant
improvements in independence across a number of major life
areas. More specifically, youth and young adults with
intellectual and developmental disabilities who participated in
CIE showed substantial improvement in activities related to
navigating their surroundings, advocating for themselves and
others, completing home living tasks, maintaining health and
safety practices, participating in community events, and
engaging in new ways of learning (Inge et al., 2023; Schall et
al., 2020). Similar gains in independence were not observed for
control group participants who did not engage in CIE (Inge et
al., 2023; Schall et al., 2020). The positive impact of CIE on
areas of personal independence have massive implications for
opening up more life choices and opportunities for people with
disabilities in the areas of independent living, community
participation, education, and socialization, all of which
facilitate a happy and healthy life.
The evidenced-based processes used to assist people with
complex support needs achieve CIE promote long-term job
retention because they foster a relationship that is
advantageous for everyone involved. Considerable care is placed
on arranging a good "job match" between a business and a person
with a disability. The resulting position is one that utilizes
the job seeker's abilities and preferences in ways that are
particularly beneficial to a specific business. By implementing
flexible and highly individualized approaches, people with even
the most complex support needs have secured and maintained
employment in a wide range of industries including healthcare,
hospitality, retail, manufacturing, distribution, food service,
entertainment, sports and recreation, education,
transportation, facilities management, finance, technology, and
child care (Wehman et al., 2019). When a good job match is
made, employers gain reliable and competent workers who perform
real work tasks that measurably benefit their businesses. At
the same time, workers with disabilities are compensated at
competitive wages to do meaningful work in areas they find
interesting. These results underpin the necessity of
transitioning from sheltered work to CIE.
Sheltered work settings do not provide the same
opportunities as CIE settings that lead to substantial growth
in financial and personal independence. People with
disabilities who participate in sheltered work typically make
subminimum wage and are left in a perpetual state of poverty
with few chances to better their economic circumstances. They
are unable to financially support themselves in essential areas
of life including independent living, recreation and leisure,
health, and retirement in ways comparable to those in CIE. In
sheltered work, there are no opportunities for significant pay
raises, no hierarchy of jobs to advance to, and a restricted
ability to learn new skills or advanced skills as the types of
work offered within facilities is highly limited. People with
disabilities who participate in sheltered work are also largely
separated from outside professional networks that could help
them pursue more rewarding or lucrative work options.
Essentially, people with disabilities in segregated settings
are left with no access to the avenues people without
disabilities traditionally use to create economic change or
personal growth.
References
Inge, K., Avellone, L., Wehman, P., Broda, M., & Joy, J.
(2023). Effects of customized employment on the independence of
youth with intellectual and developmental disabilities.
Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities, 61(6), 481-496.
https://doi.org/10.1352/1934-9556-61.6.481
Schall, C., Sima, A. P., Avellone, L. Wehman, P., McDonough,
J., & Brown, A. (2020) The effect of business internships model
and employment on enhancing the independence of young adults
with significant impact from autism. Intellectual and
Developmental Disabilities, 58(4), 301-313. https://doi.org/
10.1352/1934-9556-58.4.301
Wehman, P. (2023). Supported employment and customized
employment: How effective are these interventions and what has
been their impact on the field?. Journal of Vocational
Rehabilitation, 58, 237-247.
Wehman, P., Schall, C., McDonough, J., Graham, C., Brooke, V.,
Riehle, J. E., Brooke, A., Ham, W., Lau, S., Allen, J., &
Avellone, L. (2017). Effects of an employer-based intervention
on employment outcomes for youth with significant support needs
due to autism. Autism, 21, 276-290. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1362361316635826
Wehman, P., Schall, C., McDonough, J., Sima, A., Brooke, A,
Ham, W., Whittenburg, H., Brooke, V., Avellone, L., & Reihle,
E. (2019). Competitive employment for transition-aged youth
with significant impact from autism: A multi-site randomized
clinical trial. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders,
50(6), 1822-1897. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-019-03940-2
Question:
The Disability Employment Incentive Act which I cosponsor
would help encourage employers to hire and retain employees
with disabilities by enhancing three existing tax benefits.
People with a disability should have a variety of choices when
applying to jobs, and the intent of this bill is to expand
these options.
How would these employer benefits change the employment
landscape for persons living with a disability?
Response:
Choice in employment is critical. We all want the ability
to pursue work we find interesting, challenging and rewarding.
Despite being talented and capable workers, people with
disabilities are often limited in the types of jobs they can
pursue because employers are reluctant or unwilling to provide
quality opportunities due to uncertainties surrounding how such
a hire would impact their business. Increasing and expanding
tax benefits has the potential to greatly improve competitive
integrated employment (CIE) outcomes by addressing several
existing barriers to employment from the business side.
Addressing the disparate level of workforce participation
experienced by people with disabilities compared to people
without disabilities requires comprehensive efforts to address
both supply-side and demand-side factors. Historically, the
approach to improving employment circumstances for people with
disabilities centered around training and support to make them
more marketable to employers (i.e., supply-side). However, the
essential role of the business (i.e., demand-side) has recently
received more attention. Addressing both supply-side and
demand-side factors is critical because no amount of highly
effective vocational services provided to an individual with a
disability will improve their degree of workforce participation
if businesses are not willing to hire them. Unfortunately,
there are a number of persistent attitudinal barriers and
misperceptions among employers that leave them disinclined to
hire workers with disabilities. Demand-side barriers include
employer concerns about the capability of a person with a
disability to do a job, the extra time it might take for them
to perform a duty compared to other workers, the cost of
providing accommodations where necessary, safety concerns
within the workplace, the potential need to take more time off
than those without disabilities, and the possibility of making
other workers without disabilities uncomfortable (Chan et al.,
2010; Iwanaga et al., 2021).
The Disability Employment Incentive Act includes tax
benefits that work to alleviate some of these demand-side
barriers, consequently encouraging employers to offer more
opportunities to job seekers with disabilities. An important
first step in increasing CIE outcomes for people with
disabilities is to provide them with increased opportunities to
directly showcase their skills and talents. This will help
combat preexisting negative stereotypes that employers and co-
workers may hold about the ability of people with disabilities
to serve as a contributing member of a business. Tax benefits,
such as the Work Opportunity Tax Credit that offer credit for
salaries paid to workers are persuasive because they enable
employers to give workers with a disability a chance to work in
a fiscally low-risk manner. This type of incentive can be
especially impactful in providing more opportunities to job
seekers who have little-to-no prior work history, which is
unfortunately the case for many individuals with disabilities
who have high support needs, those who are transitioning from
subminimum wage work to CIE, and young adults with disabilities
who are entering the workforce for the first time. Such tax
incentives also include retention requirements which encourage
businesses to support and maintain employees long enough for
them to sufficiently learn the job, secure appropriate
accommodations, and demonstrate their capacity to contribute in
a way that boosts sales, profits, efficiency or other measures
that promote the success of a business.
Another advantage of the proposed tax benefits is the
potential reduction in employer concerns surrounding the costs
of hiring a person with a disability. Tax benefits such as the
Architectural and Transportation Barrier Tax Credit can help
mitigate the amount employers might spend on providing supports
and accommodations to an employee with a disability. Recent
research indicates that smaller businesses are more reluctant
than larger businesses to hire people with disabilities as a
result of being less likely to have appointed personnel who are
knowledgeable about how to provide reasonable accommodations
under the Americans with Disabilities Act (1990) and feelings
of having fewer resources to provide accommodations or modify
physical workspaces (Iwanaga et al., 2021). This is hugely
problematic given that the vast majority of businesses
(approximately 99.9%) in the United States are small businesses
(U.S. Small Business Administration, 2023). Any reluctance on
the part of small businesses to hire individuals with
disabilities will dramatically restrict their employment
options. If a small business is in a position to hire two
equally qualified candidates, one with a disability and one
without, the business may be hesitant to hire the person with a
disability due to uncertainties about the cost of making
disability accommodations. Tax credits such as the Disability
Access Expenditures Credit, which specifically assist small
businesses, level this playing field between candidates by
moderating the cost of hiring the person with a disability.
In addition, the Architectural and Transportation Barrier
Tax Credit aims to address the issue of transportation, which
is one of the most significant and persistent barriers to
employment for people with disabilities. People with
disabilities consistently face difficulty finding available,
reliable, and accessible transportation necessary for obtaining
and retaining CIE (Graham et al., 2018; Sabella & Bezyak,
2019). Financial support that enhances transportation options
will dramatically open up more employment opportunities for
people with disabilities. As policy efforts continue to address
the removal of barriers to CIE for people with disabilities, it
will be necessary to continue to target transportation. A
commonly cited obstacle among agencies attempting to transition
from subminimum wage to CIE is a lack of options for getting
people to and from a job. Through our work, my colleagues and I
have found that many agencies who have already successfully
transitioned to CIE have reportedly solved this problem by
purchasing fleets of vehicles to meet the transportation needs
of their clients. However, this is expensive and currently not
within the reach of all agencies. Future opportunities to
assist agencies with vehicle purchases and other transportation
solutions as they foster more CIE opportunities for people with
disabilities are needed.
References
Chan, F., Strauser, D., Gervey, R., & Lee, E. J. (2010).
Introduction to demand-side factors related to employment of
people with disabilities. Journal of Occupational
Rehabilitation, 20, 407-411. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10926-
010-9243-7
Graham, C. W., Inge, K. J., Wehman, P., Seward, H. E., &
Bogenschutz, M. D. (2018). Barriers and facilitators to
employment as reported by people with physical disabilities: An
across disability type analysis. Journal of Vocational
Rehabilitation, 48(2), 207-218. https://doi.org/10.3233/JVR-
180929
Iwanaga, K., Chen, X., Grenawalt, T. A., Mpofu, N., Chan, F.,
Lee, B., ... & Tansey, T. N. (2021). Employer attitudes and
practices affecting the recruitment and hiring of people with
disabilities: A scoping review. Journal of Rehabilitation,
87(2), 4-16.
Sabella, S. A., & Bezyak, J. L. (2019). Barriers to public
transportation and employment: A national survey of individuals
with disabilities. Journal of Applied Rehabilitation
Counseling, 50(3), 174-185. https://doi.org/10.1891/0047-
2220.50.3.174
U.S. Small Business Administration. (2023). Frequently asked
questions about small businesses in 2023. https://
advocacy.sba.gov/2023/03/07/frequently-asked-questions-about-
small-business-2023/
Question:
The Raise the Wage Act of 2023 which I cosponsor would
gradually increase the minimum wage to 17 dollars per hour by
2029. This bill would also end the ability for employers to pay
people with a disability subminimum wage. This provides workers
with disabilities the opportunity to be competitively employed
and participate more fully in their communities.
Has research shown that paying a subminimum wage helped
people with a disability transition to higher pay employment as
originally intended?
Response:
There is no empirical evidence suggesting that subminimum
wage work is effective or necessary for achieving competitive
integrated employment (CIE) outcomes for people with
disabilities, including those with the highest support needs.
The notion that subminimum wage is a stepping stool to CIE is
based on a faulty premise that people with complex support
needs require preparatory training before they can pursue real
work for real pay (Avellone et al., 2023). Segregated
employment models that pay subminimum wages follow a "train,
then place" philosophy that puts people in a system where they
rarely ever leave the "training" phase. This is because
transition to CIE from a sheltered workshop is based on a
person's ability to demonstrate "readiness to work" through the
display of specific and subjective skills that are unneeded to
secure a competitive job. For instance, segregated models use
productivity metrics to evaluate work performance (e.g.,
progress performing a repetitive assembly task). Since
segregated models rely on contract work or limited group work
arrangements, opportunities for variation in tasks is highly
limited. Therefore, the type of work a person is asked to do is
not necessarily personally motivating or reflective of their
individual work goals. Measuring overall "job readiness" based
on a person's ability to do a few unrewarding tasks that do not
tap into their personal employment strengths is a faulty gauge
for what they are capable of doing in other contexts. This also
creates an unfair system where people with a disability have
little opportunity to demonstrate they are worthy and capable
of more.
In comparison, CIE models adhere to a "place, then train"
approach and are backed by over four decades of scientific
research (Wehman, 2023). Integrated models (e.g., supported
employment, customized employment, transition-to-work
internship models, inclusive postsecondary education programs,
etc.) immediately start working toward CIE. Instead of
executing uniform and arbitrary metrics to determine work
readiness, integrated service models utilize each individual
person's strengths, interests, needs, and preferences in a way
that aligns with the needs of an employer. This results in a
mutually beneficial relationship where people with even the
most complex support needs can contribute meaningfully to their
communities in ways that are intrinsically motivating and
highly useful.
Findings from a recent review of the scientific literature
examining the existing body of evidence for segregated and
integrated employment models returned no support for segregated
models as an effective step toward achieving CIE. In this
review, Taylor et al. (2023) summarized these findings:
"Overall, this review found no evidence in support of
segregation as a method of achieving any meaningful preferred
employment outcome-not in CIE, not in wages, not in hours, not
in cost, not in quality of life, not in achieving greater
independence. Comparatively, integrated vocational service
models described by studies led to better employment outcomes
in terms of job placement, stability and retention, benefits,
independence, and several markers of individual health."
In addition, there is some evidence to suggest that time
spent in a segregated work setting can actually be detrimental
to achieving CIE. Cimera et al. (2011; 2012) found that people
with intellectual and developmental disabilities who had no
prior history of segregated workshop participation achieved
better CIE outcomes than those with prior participation in a
workshop. More specifically, those without a prior workshop
history worked more hours, earned more per hour and cost less
to serve in employment support than those with prior segregated
work histories. Other research has shown a link between more
time spent in segregated settings and poorer CIE outcomes.
Findings from a study conducted by Christensen and Richardson
(2017) found that participants who had been in a sheltered
workshop for more than five years experienced more challenges
transitioning to CIE than those who spent less than five years
in the same sheltered workshop setting.
In summary, there is no substantial evidence indicating a
need for subminimum wage or segregated employment as a pre-
requisite to CIE. This is true regardless of the type or
severity of a person's disability (Wehman et al., 2023). In
fact, findings from a 2020 report from the U.S. Commission on
Civil Rights investigating subminimum wage practices found no
significant differences in the general profiles of those
working for subminimum wages and those working in CIE. Decades
of research have already identified a number of highly
effective service models that have documented efficacy in
leading to CIE outcomes for individuals with all levels of
support needs, including those that are most complex (Wehman et
al., 2018). Sheltered workshops only institute unnecessary
delays to achieving CIE. Time, money, and other resources are
better spent on expanding the provision of integrated
employment models that have documented effectiveness in
achieving CIE outcomes.
References
Avellone, L., Taylor, J., Wehman, P., Inge, K., & Brooke, V.
(2023). State-level analysis of subminimum wage use for
individuals with disabilities in the United States:
Implications for policy and practice. Research and Practice for
Persons with Severe Disabilities, 48(3), 127-138. https://
doi.org/10.1177/15407969231192104
Cimera, R.E. (2011). Does being in sheltered workshops improve
the employment outcomes of supported employees with
intellectual disabilities? Journal of Vocational
Rehabilitation, 35(1), 21-27. https://doi.org/10.3233/JVR-2011-
0550
Cimera, R.E., Wehman, P., West, M., & Burgess, S. (2012). Do
sheltered workshops enhance employment outcomes for adults with
autism spectrum disorder? Autism: The International Journal of
Research & Practice, 16(1), 87-94. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1362361311408129
Christensen, J. & Richardson, K. (2017). Project SEARCH
workshop to work: Participant reflections on the journey
through career discovery. Journal of Vocational Rehabilitation,
46(3), 341-354. https://doi.org/10.3233/JVR-170871
Taylor, J., Avellone, L., Wehman, P., & Brooke, V. (2023). The
efficacy of competitive integrated employment versus segregated
employment for persons with disabilities: A systematic review.
Journal of Vocational Rehabilitation, 58(1), 63-78. https://
doi.org/10.3233/JVR-221225
U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. (2020). Subminimum wages:
Impacts on the civil rights of people with disabilities.
https://www.usccr.gov/reports/2020/subminimum-wages-impacts-
civil-rights-people-disabilities
Wehman, P. (2023). Supported employment and customized
employment: How effective are these interventions and what has
been their impact on the field?. Journal of Vocational
Rehabilitation, 58, 237-247.
Wehman, P., Taylor, J., Brooke, V., Avellone, L., Whittenburg,
H., Ham, W., Brooke, A. & Carr, S. (2018). Toward competitive
employment for persons with intellectual and developmental
disabilities: What progress have we made and where do we need
to go. Research and Practice for Persons with Severe
Disabilities, 43(3), 131-144. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1540796918777730
Senator Elizabeth Warren
Question:
Electronic surveillance and algorithmic management (ESAM)
pose significant risks to workers' health and safety, with the
practice particularly problematic in warehousing and similar
sectors.\1\ Recent investigations have shown that at Amazon
warehouses, tens of thousands of workers are injured on the job
each year due in large part to the company's draconian quota
systems, enforced by algorithms that give little or no
flexibility to workers.\2\ Many of these injuries result in
temporary or permanent disabilities for workers, necessitating
workplace accommodations - yet another report from last year
revealed that Amazon's process for providing reasonable
accommodations as required by the Americans with Disabilities
Act (ADA) is supremely lacking.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See e.g., Center for Democracy and Technology, "Organizations
Urge Biden Administration To Protect Workers from Increasing Threat of
Workplace Surveillance Technologies," press release, April 3, 2023,
https://cdt.org/press/organizations-urge-biden-administration-to-
protect-workers-from-increasing-threat-of-workplace-surveillance-
technologies/.
\2\ Strategic Organizing Center, "IN DENIAL: AMAZON'S CONTINUING
FAILURE TO FIX ITS INJURY CRISIS," April 2023, https://thesoc.org/wp-
content/uploads/2023/04/SOC--In-Denial--Amazon-Injury-Report-April-
2023.pdf; In These Times, "'It Kind of Feels Like Prison': Injured,
Burned Out and Under Surveillance at Amazon," Katrina Pham, October 26,
2023, https://inthesetimes.com/article/injury-burnout-surveillance-
amazon-warehouse-workers-uic-report.
\3\ CBS News, "Amazon is failing to provide accommodations for
disabled workers, labor group claims," Sanvi Bangalore, July 26, 2023,
https://www.cbsnews.com/news/amazon-disabled-workers-american-
disabilities-act-violations-report/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
How do inflexible quotas and ESAM systems create barriers
to entry for workers with preexisting disabilities?
Response:
Put plainly, workplace inflexibility is not conducive to
disability inclusion. In addition, a lack of flexibility is
particularly exclusive to people with complex support needs.
There is already an unfortunate history in the United States of
erroneously measuring the employment worth of a person with a
disability by whether or not they can meet a specific
productivity metric when performing a repetitive task while
being monitored (i.e., sheltered employment). Those who cannot
meet this metric have erroneously been deemed less valuable to
the workforce. This has resulted in the longstanding unethical
practice of placing people with disabilities in segregated
facilities and paying them subminimum wages. For people with
disabilities, companies that use quota-based monitoring systems
are essentially transplanting archaic performance metrics used
in 14c subminimum wage workshops into competitive integrated
employment (CIE) and instead of paying them less than they are
worth, the company is excluding them from work opportunities
altogether.
A job seeker with complex support needs is a person who
requires highly personalized strategies to assist them in
overcoming areas of disability-related impact such as
cognition, communication, physical, sensory or emotional-
behavioral challenges. These individuals are at the highest
risk for experiencing unemployment and employment that garners
subminimum wages. They are therefore an essential group of job
seekers that must be accommodated in disability inclusion
efforts within all workplaces across our country. To perform
successfully on-the-job, individuals with complex support needs
often require a number of services not required by those
without disabilities, such as diverse strategies for learning,
adaptations to work tasks or the work environment, assistive
technology, and other forms of support. They may also require
accommodations that involve extra breaks, extra time to
complete tasks, or other individualized provisions that help
them be an efficient worker. For instance, a new hire with
complex support needs may need additional time or support to
learn their assigned job tasks. It may also take time to figure
out what supports will be most effective to help that person
meet their employer's expectations. A person with complex
support needs will most likely have an employment support
provider trained in how to identify and implement proper
supports (from Vocational Rehabilitation, Community
Rehabilitation Providers, or other service agencies) so while
the right strategies will eventually be put in place, the
process takes time. This may result in an initial inability on
the part of the worker with a disability to meet rigid preset
quotas but inevitably lead to long-term competency in
completing essential job tasks. If this process slows their
ability to meet inflexible quotas during their new employee
probationary period, then they risk disciplinary action,
termination, and undue stress. Inflexible quota systems no
doubt create huge barriers to employment for people with high
support needs, but the same principle applies to workers with
less severe disabilities who may have very recently acquired a
disability and are still recognizing their support needs or
young adults with disabilities who are becoming aware of their
support needs in a work capacity for the first time.
Flexibility that allows for the proper use of modifications and
accommodations is needed to help all individuals with
disabilities access employment.
Rigid quota systems also operate on the faulty premise that
worker contribution is determined solely by work output. This
is not true. Businesses markedly benefit from properly
accommodating workers with disabilities. Any argument implying
that making quota-based work more malleable to accommodate
workers with disabilities has the potential to harm a business
negates the multitude of benefits derived from hiring people
with disabilities. First, investing in disability inclusion
pays off. According to a recent report by Accenture and
Disability: IN (2023), businesses that adopt key disability
inclusion criteria yield 1.6x more revenue, 2.6x more net
income, and twice as much economic profit as industry peers.
Secondly, workers with disabilities are highly loyal which
creates a return on investment in training time and costs. Not
only do people with disabilities show less employee turnover
but they also demonstrate less absenteeism and greater levels
of punctuality (Aichner, 2021; Linsay et al., 2018). In
addition, the Commission on Disability Employment reports that
companies who diversified their workforce in ways that include
people with disabilities experienced a 90% increase in employee
retention. Third, employees with disabilities work with higher
levels of concentration, perform more consistently, and perform
at a higher level of accuracy than those without disabilities
(Aichner, 2021). This has large implications for avoiding costs
associated with human error and employee negligence. Lastly,
hiring individuals with disabilities also comes with
reputational advantages as increased hiring of people with
disabilities is linked to an improved company image among the
general public (Lysaght et al. 2021). This can give a company a
competitive edge in terms of growth and sales.
An inability to meet highly inflexible productivity quotas
in order to secure or maintain employment is not the failure of
a worker with a disability. These are exclusionary practices
that are a failure of a company to see the value and
contributions of employees with disabilities in multifaceted
ways. A company that measures worker capability by one simple
metric is prescribing to a much-outdated deficit model of
disability that focuses exclusively on ways a medical condition
deviates from a norm and the subsequent limitations that
diagnoses place on a person's ability and potential. This
deficit-based model has been obsolete for over 30 years (Weick
et al., 1989). Any modern business that claims to promote
disability inclusion must engage in active hiring and retention
strategies that promote a strengths-based view of disability.
This is a more holistic approach to recognizing the
individualized assets of every unique person with a disability.
The importance of establishing a strengths-based model for
employment practices within the United States has implications
for every working-age adult. Any person without a disability
can very suddenly become a person with a disability at any
given moment. In an instant, a stroke, fall, car accident, or
other unforeseen accident can immediately leave any one of us
as a person with a disability who needs access to quality
employment in order to cover basic living needs. Thus, allowing
a precedent that it is acceptable to tie worker worth to one
profit-based metric has profound implications for all workers.
References
Accenture. (2023). The disability inclusion imperative. https:/
/www.accenture.com/content/dam/accenture/final/accenture-com/
document-2/Disability-Inclusion-Report-Business-Imperative.pdf
Aichner, T. (2021). The economic argument for hiring people
with disabilities. Humanities and Social Sciences
Communications, 8(1), 1-4. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-021-
00707-y
Commission on Disability Employment (n.d.). Leading the way to
inclusive workforce.https://ceocommission.org/sites/default/
files/2021-01/Profitability%20and%20Disability%20Inclusion.pdf
Lindsay, S., Cagliostro, E., Albarico, M., Mortaji, N., &
Karon, L. (2018). A systematic review of the benefits of hiring
people with disabilities. Journal of Occupational
Rehabilitation, 28, 634-655. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10926-
018-9756-z
Lysaght, R., Bobbette, N., & Ciampa, M. A. (2021).
Productivity-based wages and employment of people with
disabilities: International usage and policy considerations.
Journal of Disability Policy Studies, 32(3), 171-181. https://
doi.org/10.1177/1044207320943605
Weick, A., Rapp, C., Sullivan, W. P., & Kisthardt, W. (1989). A
strengths perspective for social work practice. Social Work,
34(4), 350-354. https://www.jstor.org/stable/23715838
Question:
When ESAM systems create circumstances in which workers
suffer disabling injuries, how does this threaten workers'
continued ability to meet quotas and other algorithmically
determined metrics, especially when the process of receiving
reasonable disability accommodations can be difficult to
navigate?
Response:
All injured workers indisputably need protection, but on-
the-job injuries do not always rise to the qualifying level of
disability to warrant protection under the Americans with
Disabilities Act (, 1990). This leads to two types of
injured workers; those that subsequently qualify for ADA
accommodations and those that do not. Injured workers with a
disability that meets the legal definition applicable under ADA
are protected from discrimination on the basis of disability in
all aspects related to employment including hiring, firing,
lay-offs, job assignments, leave, etc. Under ADA, a person with
a qualified disability must be able to perform the essential
functions of a job either with or without reasonable
accommodations provided by their employer. Reasonable
accommodations are generally inexpensive, easy to implement,
and require little changes on the part of the employer. Recent
data on 3,528 employers provided by the Office of Disability
Employment Policy's Job Accommodation Network (2023a) indicated
that about half of employers (49.9%) didn't need to spend
anything at all on the accommodations they provided.
Approximately 43.3% provided accommodations associated with a
one-time cost with a median expenditure of $300. Only 7.2% of
businesses provided accommodations that required on-going costs
(Job Accommodation Network, 2023a). This means that injured
workers with a qualifying disability are able to execute
essential job tasks with little to no undue hardship to an
employer providing a reasonable accommodation. This is not a
big ask, particularly for large, highly profitable companies
who can and should have designated disability experts in
positions to handle requests in a timely manner.
Unfortunately, there are currently no clear guidelines
about the obligation of an employer to provide a temporary
accommodation to an employee with a disability under ADA while
a formal request is being explored (Job Accommodation Network,
2023b). Employers are free to provide this service, and many do
because it benefits them to have a worker back-to-task, but
this is not definitively required. Unnecessary delays in
responses to reasonable accommodation requests or a failure to
provide accommodations undermines the very advantage of ADA
which allows workers with disabilities an opportunity to
perform at a rate comparable to peers without disabilities
through the use of alternate strategies. In some instances,
depending upon their disability and the type of accommodation,
this also allows a worker to perform safely at a similar rate.
These accommodations are highly effective. Only 13% of
companies report that accommodations are ineffective (Job
Accommodation Network, 2023a). Therefore, the provision of
reasonable accommodations for workers with a qualified
disability should occur before other alternatives, such as
reassignment to light duty which can provide lower pay.
Companies that do not immediately and productively address
disability-related needs create environments were employees
with disabilities will be hesitant to disclose or seek an
accommodation. Employees are likely to feel pressured to
continue working without reasonable accommodations due to fears
about reduction in wages, decreases in hours, reassignment to
lower grade positions or placement on involuntarily leave. This
leads to highly dangerous work environments that have the
potential for workers to sustain harm. These types of
conditions are also likely to disproportionately impact people
experiencing lower socioeconomic conditions who feel
financially obligated to continue working despite health risks.
It can also disproportionately impact workers with intellectual
and developmental disabilities who have limited self-advocacy
skills, lack awareness about the association between injury
care and long-term health risks, and who may not understand
disability rights or their options for filing disability
complaints when their needs go unmet. These are vulnerable
populations who need protective measures put in place.
References
Job Accommodation Network. (2023a). Costs and benefits of
accommodation. https://askjan.org/topics/costs.cfm
Job Accommodation Network. (2023b). Employer's practical guide
to reasonable accommodations under the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA). https://askjan.org/publications/
employers/employers-guide.cfm
Question:
The Supplemental Security Income (SSI) earned income
disregard was set at $65 for more than half a century ago, and
has not increased in line with inflation.\4\ This presents a
significant barrier to work for people with disabilities who
receive SSI - if the threshold had been indexed to inflation,
the disregard would have stood at $416 in 2022, allowing far
more SSI recipients to work and earn income.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Urban Institute, "Encouraging Work in the Supplemental Security
Income Program," Jack Smalligan and Chantel Boyens, March 2022, https:/
/www.urban.org/sites/default/files/2022-03/
Encouraging%20Work%20in%20the%20Supplemental%20Security%20Income%20Progr
am.pdf.
\5\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
How does the archaic SSI earned income disregard level
disincentivize people with disabilities from working?
Response:
The seriously outdated Supplemental Security Income (SSI)
earned income exclusions have several fundamental issues that
disincentivize people with disabilities from pursuing quality
employment. First and foremost, it sends contradictory messages
to people with disabilities about whether or not they should
pursue work (Olney & Lyle, 2011). Competitive integrated
employment is a direct avenue to a higher quality of life via
access to financial and personal independence, an ability to
contribute to one's community in a meaningful way, greater
access to social circles, and numerous opportunities for
personal growth (Cassar & Meier, 2018; Taylor et al., 2022).
Given the plethora of benefits associated with workforce
participation that impact health and well-being, there should
be no confusion among people with disabilities about the fact
that they should pursue competitive work goals. The Social
Security Administration has made a clear stance that helping
people with disabilities take advantage of employment
opportunities is a high priority (Social Security
Administration, 2023). However, a person with a disability
looking to work is forced to navigate an extremely confusing
process for securing work and maintaining their disability
benefits. Many who are eager to become employed suddenly
encounter what is known as the "disability benefits cliff."
This refers to a situation where a person with a disability who
starts receiving a paycheck generates an income that is
suddenly no longer low enough to qualify for benefits but still
isn't high enough to sufficiently cover basic and essential
life needs. This is where workers with disabilities begin to
feel as though they are receiving a conflicting message about
becoming employed. The current system seems to say "You should
work, but not too often and not for too much money."
This predicament is a serious impediment to the many
national efforts to include more people with disabilities in
the American workforce. Its unintended consequence is to
continually restrict employment opportunities for people with
disabilities to jobs and gig work rather than careers.
Current SSI income disregards force people with
disabilities to;
become underemployed in jobs below their potential;
remain in entry level positions rather than
participating at all levels within a company;
forgo promotions that may include a pay raise or else
take the promotion and do more work for less compensation;
work less hours which provides less opportunity for
professional growth
search for lower paying jobs that aren't necessarily
aligned with their skills, interests, and abilities;
stifle the development and growth of a business in which
a person has cultivated through self-employment; and
remain chronically underrepresented in progressive and
higher-paying industries like science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (i.e., STEM fields).
We currently have a system that works against disability
inclusiveness efforts within employment by requiring people who
receive benefits to remain in stagnant circumstances. People
with disabilities who are caught in this system additionally
report stress and anxiety about the decision to work and
potential loss of benefits. Examples include feelings of being
stuck and limited with respect to work options, feelings of
being punished for wanting to work, feelings of being
micromanaged by having to log even minimal amounts of spending
in order to stay safely within income limits, fear of being
slightly overpaid without realizing it and suddenly owing
money, and additional strains imposed on those who still have
to curb work opportunities but reside in areas where the
regional standard of living is higher (Olney and Lyle, 2011;
Savin, 2019).
An improved system would eliminate the risks associated
with loss of benefits for people with disabilities who pursue
competitive integrated employment. It would provide limits that
facilitate quality employment outcomes rather than confine
people with disabilities to lower level work. Ideally, this
would include the ability to work more hours, earn more money,
participate in upward mobility, and secure work in higher
paying fields.
References
Cassar, L., & Meier, S. (2018). Nonmonetary incentives and the
implications of work as a source of meaning. Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 32(3), 215-238. https://doi.org/10.1257/
jep.32.3.215
Olney, M. F., & Lyle, C. (2011). The benefits trap: Barriers to
employment experienced by SSA beneficiaries. Rehabilitation
Counseling Bulletin, 54(4), 197-209. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0034355211400209
Savin, K. (2019). Being on SSI is a full-time job: How SSI and
SSDI beneficiaries work around and within labor incentive
programs. All Faculty Scholarship. 506. https://
scholarlycommons.pacific.edu/shs-all/506
Social Security Administration. (2023). Supplemental security
income (SSI) work incentives. https://www.ssa.gov/ssi/text-
work-ussi.htm
Taylor, J., Avellone, L, Brooke, V., Wehman, P., Inge, K.,
Schall, C., & Iwanaga, K. (2022). The impact of competitive
integrated employment on economic, psychological, and physical
health outcomes for individuals with intellectual and
developmental disabilities, Journal of Applied Research in
Intellectual Disabilities, 35, 448-459. https://doi.org/
10.1111/jar.12974
Question:
How does this disincentive keep people with disabilities in
or around the poverty line?
Response:
The more a person with a disability generates in countable
income, the lower their disability benefit will be up until
that income exceeds the total allowable, in which case they
will cease to receive any benefit. The conceptual premise
underpinning this process is that as a person with a disability
increases their income they will subsequently need less
financial support. The central problem with this notion is that
the earned income disregard, originally established in 1972,
hasn't been updated to reflect current times. The current
earned income disregard limits call for the first $20 of earned
or unearned income and $65 of earned income per month to apply
for exemption. Then, any additional income acquired through
employment reduces benefits by $0.50 on the dollar. These are
incredibly low limits. At those limits, a person with a
disability's benefits begin being reduced even if their overall
income is still at or below the federal poverty line (Smalligan
& Boyens, 2022). Consequently, people with very small incomes
max out of SSI without being able to access employer provided
benefits. Meanwhile, those who may not max out remain
continually at or under the federal poverty line on their
incomes (Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, 2022). This
leaves people with disabilities in a continual cycle of living
on the edge of, or fully in, poverty with no reasonable way to
exit those circumstances.
The current limits have not been adjusted for inflation.
Were they to have been adjusted, these limits would equate to a
massive difference of $128 in earned/unearned income
accompanied by $416 in earnings (Smalligan & Boyens, 2022).
Without adjusted limits, people with disabilities experience a
number of problems that prevent them from being able to improve
their economic situation. The currently low limits
disincentivize people with disabilities from saving money for
extremely common expenditures (e.g., having a sufficient
emergency fund, pursuing a hobby) and impede their ability to
save for larger purchases or buy higher quality items that may
enhance their health and happiness. Such items include higher
quality food or exercise equipment which could actually save
them money in medical costs long-term (Savin, 2019). The
existing limits also discourage people with disabilities from
saving for retirement and impact how they can financially plan
for their future. In addition, the resource limits for a
married couple receiving SSI is less than that for two
individuals receiving SSI (e.g., $2,000/ person and $3,000/
couple) which punishes mutual recipients who choose to marry.
This discourages dual recipients from entering into personally
and economically advantageous situations by sharing living
expenses. Low limits also discourage people with disabilities
from saving for employment-related endeavors that could
potentially elevate their economic situation. While there are
some methods for circumnavigating this process in order to
pursue employment goals (e.g., Plan to Achieve Self-Support
) by exempting funds used for educational expenses or
supplies, many people report being unaware of these supports or
finding them too difficult to use. Consequently, enrollment in
PASS is low and has declined in recent years (Domin & Timmons,
2019). As a result, many opt to not take the risk and forgo
saving. Other options, such as the Achieving a Better Life
Experience (ABLE accounts), allow family members to set aside
money for a person with a disability without impact to
benefits, but this only applies to individuals who have a
disability prior to the age of 26 (Social Security
Administration, 2024).
The decision to sacrifice saving or avoid acquiring even
small amounts of additional income is one my colleagues and I
have seen often in our work. Consider the following example;
The research center in which I am employed will occasionally
offer small incentives to participants to complete tasks such
as filling out surveys as part of a study. I was contacted by a
woman with autism (and her mother) in one of our studies who,
despite filling out the requested surveys, informed me that she
couldn't accept the $20 check. She and her family stated that
after careful consideration, she could not cash the check
because they didn't want to have to go through the process of
reporting it as income and were concerned that it might impact
her receipt of benefits. They felt it was easier and safer to
just refuse the check. Imagine having to fret this much over
$20.
Confusion and worry over how additional income will impact
benefits has led some people with disabilities to subsequently
place very wide cushions between their earnings and the maximum
limit. My colleagues and I have worked in a number of states
where the minimum wage now exceeds the federal minimum. While
raising state minimum wages is great, we have worked with a
number of people with high support needs who suddenly struggle
to understand how to work in this situation and keep their
disability benefits. They currently lack proper guidance. While
they are earning more per hour, they have been warned that
working too much can reduce their receipt of benefits and in
turn, they often opt to work extremely few hours (e.g., as
little as one shift every two weeks). To avoid the fear and
frustration, they simply work less rather than face the
possibility of exceeding the maximum. This is an obstruction to
improved workforce participation among people with
disabilities. The limits should be high enough that people with
disabilities don't need to agonize over every additional shift
they take, raise they receive or promotion they are offered.
References
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. (2022). Policy makers
should expand and simplify supplemental security income.
https://www.cbpp.org/sites/default/files/6-30-21socsec.pdf
Domin, D., & Timmons, J. (2019). Social Security Administration
Data Show a Record Low Level of PASS Usage Among SSI
Recipients. DataNote Series, Data Note 61. Boston, MA:
University of Massachusetts Boston, Institute for Community
Inclusion. https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/229380622.pdf
Savin, K. (2019). Being on SSI is a full-time job: How SSI and
SSDI beneficiaries work around and within labor incentive
programs. All Faculty Scholarship. 506. https://
scholarlycommons.pacific.edu/shs-all/506
Smalligan, J., & Boyens, C. (March, 2022). Encouraging work in
the supplemental security income program. https://
www.urban.org/research/publication/encouraging-work-
supplemental-security-income-program
Social Security Administration. (2024). What is an ABLE
account? https://secure.ssa.gov/poms.nsf/lnx/0501130740
Question:
What actions can the Social Security Administration
unilaterally take to decrease work disincentives for people
with disabilities in its programs? What fixes does it fall to
Congress to make?
Response:
The most critical step in addressing the current issues
surrounding SSI is to increase the resource threshold from the
original limits to account for inflation. In general, changes
should no longer penalize recipients with disabilities from
accruing modest savings to cover everyday situations and free
them from worry about how to handle unexpected bills or other
unanticipated costly events. In addition, changes should no
longer penalize recipients with disabilities from saving for
retirement or marrying other recipients. Changes should ensure
that the maximum limits don't leave recipients at or below the
poverty line and scrambling to cover basic needs. These limits
place unnecessary life restrictions on recipients with
disabilities.
With regard to work, the earned income limits should be
raised so that recipients can have greater opportunities for
securing quality employment opportunities. Allowable limits
should not restrict people with disabilities to only working a
sparse number of hours, nor should it force them to decline
modest raises or promotions that may eventually lead to
economic stability because it would place extreme hardship on
them in the interim. These limitations prevent the full
inclusion of people with disabilities in the workforce and
restrict their participation to entry level positions in low
paying industries.
Lastly, all individuals with disabilities who receive SSI
should have routine access to benefits counseling. The ability
to have periodic meetings with a trained professional who can
monitor each individual's income and provide guidance on how
work will impact finances is critical to helping people
overcome fears about employment. It is not enough to only meet
during the initial job search phases of employment. Some level
of on-going participation in benefits counseling should be
required for all recipients in order to help them understand
how to advance their employment opportunities while juggling
receipt of benefits. While such a mandate will likely require
an increase in the quantity of benefits counselors nation-wide,
such a service is essential. Research demonstrates that workers
with disabilities who receive benefits counseling are more
likely to be employed and make more money than those who do not
receive the service (Iwanaga et al., 2021). Because SSI
typically caters to those who have higher support needs, such
as those with intellectual and developmental disabilities who
experience challenges in learning and problem solving, they are
likely to require this level of assistance in order to
understand the process. Many people who do not have challenges
in cognition find the process hard to navigate. Greater
assistance using such a complex system should be more readily
available to help recipients with disabilities maximize program
benefits.
References
Iwanaga, K., Wehman, P., Brooke, V., Avellone, L., & Taylor, J.
(2021). Evaluating the effect of work incentives benefits
counseling on employment outcomes of transition-age and young
adult Supplemental Security Income recipients with intellectual
disabilities: A case control study. Journal of Occupational
Rehabilitation, 31, 581-591. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10926-
020-09950-7
Senator Raphael Warnock
Question:
According to a 2020 report released by the U.S. Government
Accountability Office, many federal agencies use Schedule A
hiring authority and provide training to their hiring managers
on how to use it.\6\ However, some hiring managers report being
unfamiliar with how Schedule A authority works. In addition,
some agencies do not assess the effectiveness of their Schedule
A training, which limits the ability of hiring managers to
improve how they use the authority.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Disability Employment: Hiring Has Increased But Actions Needed
to Assess Retention, Training, and Reasonable Accommodation Efforts,
GAO-20-384, U.S. Government Accountability Office (Jun. 11, 2020),
https://www.gao.gov/products/gao-20-384.
\7\ Id. at 26-27 ("Nevertheless, the agencies . . . are unfamiliar
with or unsure of how to use the Schedule A hiring authority.").
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
How can federal agencies better assess trainings they
provide to their hiring managers and human resources
professionals when hiring individuals with disabilities?
Response:
It is great to see increased initiatives by federal
agencies to promote disability diversity among their workforce
by encouraging flexible hiring practices such as Schedule A.
However, the Government Accountability Office (2020) reports
several difficulties concerning training and implementation.
For instance, there appears to be variation in trainings on
Schedule A across federal agencies, with some providing annual
trainings and others providing more on-going training. New
employees in a hiring role have little-to-no previous
experience using Schedule A and therefore are unsure of when
and how to use it. This issue has been addressed in some, but
not all agencies, by having designated staff (i.e., Selective
Placement Program Coordinators) to provide guidance on how to
use Schedule A. Despite these efforts, agencies point to an
overall need for increased training on Schedule A among
resource personnel and hiring managers (Government
Accountability Office, 2020).
Stand-alone mandatory Schedule A trainings for all staff in
a position of hiring across all federal agencies is needed.
Disability is often lumped into other diversity, equity, and
inclusion initiatives. Without an individualized emphasis, the
disability-related content is often insufficiently covered and
the importance of the concept ends up lost or diluted for many
trainees. Findings from a study investigating employer
practices found that many supervisors across different types of
U.S. organizations, including government agencies, were unaware
that disability is a population included in diversity hiring
efforts (Phillips et al., 2019). This is a finding corroborated
by other research (e.g., Gould et al., 2019). The 2020 report
conducted by the Government Accountability Office cites the
covering of other flexible hiring strategies beyond Schedule A
as a reason for being unable to evaluate the specific impact of
trainings on Schedule A. Therefore, Schedule A trainings should
be isolated in order to highlight its content and enable
evaluation.
A comprehensive evaluation process that is both short and
long-term in scope should be developed. Short term evaluation
can assess the impact of content on changes in knowledge and
understanding related to how and when to use Schedule A. This
can include pre-to-posttests on content, questionnaires
soliciting feedback on gaps in training, or training
satisfaction surveys. Long-term evaluation includes an
examination of performance measures linked to trainings. This
could include a measurement of increases in use of Schedule A,
changes in confidence about using Schedule A, or documentation
of increased inquiries or other evidence suggesting more
consideration of Schedule A in hiring decisions. Evaluation
methods should address multi-faceted aspects of the training
including learner perspectives on the format delivery (e.g.,
online modules, in-person trainings, guidance documents, etc.),
dosage of training (e.g., frequency, length, etc.), trainer
characteristics (e.g., knowledgeable, qualified, responsive,
etc.), clarity in content (e.g., sufficient examples, inclusion
of case studies, organization of material, etc.), availability
of content (e.g., central webpage with guidance documents,
cheat sheets, or other resources), and ease of use. This
evaluation process should also include measurable efforts to
conduct needs assessments. This can occur via survey or focus
groups with those in a position to use the form to get a deeper
sense of the current issues, suggestions for training, limits
of current trainings, and reservations about using Schedule A.
This will help effectively address any specific problems.
There should also be efforts to provide more uniformity in
training across agencies to ensure quality and frequency of
Schedule A use does not significantly differ by location. In
tandem, all agencies should have an infrastructure of support
that provides access to mentoring or coaching in use of
Schedule A. This could be Selective Placement Program
Coordinators or an equivalent point of contact to help walk
hiring staff through the process and answer questions in real
time. The Government Accountability Report (2020) suggests the
prevalence of increased questions on Schedule A use by newly
hired staff. A designated point of contact in every federal
agency would provide individualized assistance to new employees
in hiring roles who have questions about how to conduct the
process. The Government Accountability Report (2020) also
indicates that use of Schedule A hiring authority is
encouraged, but not mandatory. Therefore, hiring managers are
likely to opt out of using it in the absence of support.
Lastly, federal agencies should invest in awareness
initiatives, not just trainings. Successful employment for
people with complex support needs requires flexible approaches
at every stage of the employment process. While Schedule A is a
procedure that works to accommodate people with higher support
needs, most hiring managers are unlikely to have prior
experience working with a person with a disability who would
benefit from the process and will have little overall
understanding about why this process should be different than
with other hires. Increased efforts to draw awareness to the
profile of an applicant who would benefit from Schedule A use,
the advantages of using Schedule A over traditional hiring
practices, and the overall returns on making greater efforts to
diversify a workforce in a way that highlights disability is
needed.
References
Gould, R., Harris, S. P., Mullin, C., & Jones, R. (2020).
Disability, diversity, and corporate social responsibility:
Learning from recognized leaders in inclusion. Journal of
Vocational Rehabilitation, 52(1), 29-42. https://doi.org/
10.3233/JVR-191058
Government Accountability Office (2020). Disability employment:
Hiring has increased but actions needed to assess retention,
training, and reasonable accommodation efforts. https://
www.gao.gov/products/gao-20-384
Phillips, K. G., Houtenville, A. J., O'Neill, J., & Katz, E.
(2019). The effectiveness of employer practices to recruit,
hire, and retain employees with disabilities: Supervisor
perspectives. Journal of Vocational Rehabilitation, 51(3), 339-
353. https://doi.org/10.3233/JVR-191050
Question:
What additional steps can federal agencies take to promote
the hiring and retention of individuals with disabilities?
Response:
The federal government is the largest employer in the
United States (U.S. Department of Labor, 2024). Having
successful examples of people with disabilities working in the
federal government sends a powerful statement to other
employers. Federal agencies can take a number of steps to
improve hiring and retention. First, federal agencies can start
by creating more direct pipelines from school-to-work for youth
and young adults with disabilities. This can be achieved by
cultivating more youth internship programs specifically geared
toward youth with disabilities, including those with high
support needs, that will help better prepare them for entering
federal agency jobs following exit from high school. In
addition, federal agencies can make more apprenticeship
programs available to college students with disabilities,
particularly those in inclusive postsecondary education
programs. There are currently 332 postsecondary programs on
university and community college campuses across the country
that are exclusively designed to meet the unique educational
needs of young adults with intellectual and developmental
disabilities (Think College, 2024). Many of these programs
require student participation in applied work experiences as a
condition of program completion. Federal agencies could take
steps to connect with these programs and provide valuable work
training opportunities that prepare students for future
permanent employment in government work.
Federal agencies can also take steps to improve individual-
level and systems-level processes to facilitate better
employment opportunities for people with disabilities. On an
individual-level, federal agencies should establish or increase
existing partnerships with disability employment organizations
(e.g., State Vocational Rehabilitation Agencies, Community
Rehabilitation Providers, etc.). Such organizations can provide
valuable assistance with recruiting qualified applicants, and
provide guidance on any personalized support a particular
individual with a disability might need during the hiring,
onboarding, and retention process to ensure employment success.
This can be a particularly helpful partnership for increasing
employment opportunities for people with higher support needs.
At a systems-level approach, federal agencies should develop or
expand efforts to receive combined consultation on general
hiring and retention initiatives from those with lived
experiences and/or professional expertise. Regular consultation
with Community Advisory Boards comprised of working-age youth
and adults with disabilities, families, employment support
providers, transition-educators, and researchers can
drastically inform disability inclusiveness practices.
Ideally, each federal agency should have a qualified
disability champion that helps establish a barrier-free
workplace. The role of a disability champion is to represent
the voice and position of people with disabilities as it
relates to internal processes within a business.
Responsibilities may include reviewing job postings to
eliminate or reword criteria that would unintentionally exclude
people with disabilities, raise awareness about disability
among other employees in the business, and identify ways to
create more disability-friendly work environments. Having an
appointed and skilled person serving in this capacity can go a
long way toward improving the hiring and retention of people
with disabilities. 3101(1)
References
Think College. (2024). College search. https://
thinkcollege.net/college-search
U.S. Department of Labor. (2024). Federal employers. https://
www.dol.gov/agencies/odep/program-areas/employers/federal-
employment
?
=======================================================================
Statements for the Record
=======================================================================
?
U.S. Senate Special Committee on Aging
"All Means All: Empowering People with Disabilities to Thrive in
Careers and the Workplace"
February 29, 2024
Statements for the Record
Autistic Self Advocacy Network (ASAN) Testimony
On behalf of the Autistic Self Advocacy Network (ASAN),
thank you for the opportunity to provide written testimony on
the importance of Competitive Integrated Employment (CIE) to
the disability community. ASAN is a 501(c)(3) advocacy
organization run by and for autistic people.
People with disabilities are among the last groups of
Americans who are not protected by minimum wage laws. Section
14(c) of the Fair Labor Standards Act creates a rare exception
to the federal minimum wage. Through the 14(c) program,
employers can obtain a certificate from the Department of Labor
allowing them to pay workers with disabilities below the
federal minimum wage based on alleged productivity, though
productivity determinations are often structured in ways that
keep wages artificially low.\1\ According to the Government
Accountability Office (GAO), as of January 2023, at least
120,000 workers were employed under these certificates, with
half earning less than $3.50 an hour.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Whittaker, W. G. (2005, February 9). Treatment of Workers with
Disabilities Under Section 14(c) of the Fair Labor Standards Act. (CRS
Report No. RL30674). https://ecommons.cornell.edu/server/api/core/
bitstreams/9beee09a-6f8f-4a21-b5ac-c90221236bff/content
\2\ Government Accountability Office. (2023). Subminimum Wage
Program: DOL Could Do More to Ensure Timely Oversight. (GAO Publication
No. 23-105116). https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-23-105116.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
14(c) assumes that workers with disabilities are inherently
less productive than workers without disabilities and that no
employer would willingly pay full wages for disabled workers.
However, many 14(c) workers are productive enough to form part
of the supply chain in for-profit
enterprises.\3\,\4\ Like their nondisabled peers,
people with disabilities have varying skills, aptitudes, and
interests. All workers are more suited for and productive in
some jobs than others. Even an individual who is genuinely
unproductive at light industrial assembly in a 14(c) sheltered
workshop, for example, may be a high performer in a customer-
facing role with more novelty and human interaction. By keeping
people with disabilities in a segregated, one-size-fits-all
workplace with low wages, 14(c) programs prevent their
participants from finding jobs in which they might thrive. One
GAO report found that only approximately 5% of sheltered
workshop employees left to take a job in the community.\5\
Sheltered workshops are falling short of their promise to
provide disabled people with the training and tools necessary
for feasibly transitioning to CIE. The 14(c) program was meant
only to be used to the extent necessary to prevent curtailment
of opportunities for disabled people's employment, and yet it
is doing the opposite.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Disability:IN. (2019). (rep.). Sub-minimum Wage in Corporate
Supply Chains. Retrieved March 5, 2024, from https://s3.amazonaws.com/
disabilityin-bulk/2019/Sub-Minimum+Wage+
in+Corporate+Supply+Chains+final.pdf
\4\ Altman, Louis. (2013, June 27). Federal Law Allows Employers of
Those with Disabilities to Skirt Minimum Wage. Nonprofit Quarterly.
https://nonprofitquarterly.org/federal-law-allows-employers-of-those-
with-disabilities-to-skirt-minimum-wage/
\5\ General Accounting Office. (2001). Special Minimum Wage
Program, Centers Offer Employment and Support Services to Workers with
Disabilities, But Labor Should Improve Oversight. (GAO Publication No.
01-886). https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-01-886.pdf
\6\ House of Representatives, Congress. (2010, December 30). 29
U.S.C. 214 - Employment under special certificates. . U.S.
Government Publishing Office. https://www.govinfo.gov/app/details/
USCODE-2010-title29/USCODE-2010-title29-chap8-sec214
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The financial effects of subminimum wage are devastating.
No combination of SSI or SSDI payments with subminimum wage
grants financial freedom. According to a 2023 report from the
Financial Health Network, nearly half of working-age disabled
people had annual household incomes under $30k.\7\ The 2020
Annual Disability Statistics Compendium found there is a 25.9%
poverty rate for working-age disabled people who live in the
community, which is more than double the poverty rate for their
non-disabled counterparts.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Warren, A., Chege, W., Greene, M., & Berdie, L. (2023). (rep.).
The Financial Health of People With Disabilities Key Obstacles and
Opportunities. Financial Health Network. Retrieved March 5, 2024, from
https://finhealthnetwork.org/research/the-financial-health-of-people-
with-disabilities/.
\8\ Paul, S., Rafal, M., & Houtenville, A. (2020). Annual
Disability Statistics Compendium: 2020 (Table 6.3). Durham, NH:
University of New Hampshire, Institute on Disability. https://
disabilitycompendium.org/sites/default/files/user-uploads/Events/2021--
release--year/Final%20Accessibility%20Compendium%202020%20PDF--
2.1.2020reduced.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Some workers employed through 14(c) work in facilities that
primarily or exclusively employ people with disabilities. These
facilities are known as sheltered workshops. Research has shown
that sheltered workshops do not achieve any meaningful
preferred employment outcome not in CIE, not in wages, not in
hours, not in cost, not in quality of life, not in achieving
greater independence. Comparatively, integrated vocational
service models described by studies led to better employment
outcomes in terms of job placement, stability and retention,
benefits, independence, and several markers of individual
health.\9\ It costs state adult services agencies less to pay
for employment supports to help workers with disabilities
flourish in typical jobs than to keep them in sheltered
workshops.\10\ Sheltered workshops are also incredibly
exploitative. DOL's Wage and Hour Division found violations
related to the 14(c) program in two-thirds of its
investigations. By segregating employees in isolated,
disability-specific work settings that limit economic
independence, opportunity for advancement, and community
interaction, these businesses also operate contrary to
obligations under the Americans with Disabilities Act to ensure
that individuals with disabilities are able to live, work, and
receive services in the most integrated setting appropriate to
their needs.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Taylor, J. P., Avellone, L., Wehman, P., & Brooke, V. (2023).
The efficacy of competitive integrated employment versus segregated
employment for persons with disabilities: A systematic review. Journal
of Vocational Rehabilitation, 58(1), 63 78. https://doi.org/10.3233/
jvr-221225
\10\ National Council on Disability. (2012). Report on Subminimum
Wage and Supported Employment. https://www.ncd.gov/report/national-
council-on-disability-report-on-subminimum-wage-and-supported-
employment/
\11\ ADA.gov. (2023, October 31). Questions and Answers on the
Application of the ADA's Integration Mandate and Olmstead v. L.C. to
Employment and Day Services for People with Disabilities. http://
www.ada.gov/resources/olmstead-employment-qa
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Subminimum wages cause more than financial and professional
harm to people with disabilities. Not only do subminimum wages
keep people with disabilities in poverty, but they cause
psychological harm through disabled workers knowledge that they
are being paid less than their peers and less than what they
can achieve. There is no dignity in subminimum wage.
Passing the Transformation to Competitive Integrated
Employment Act (TCIEA) is a vital step toward ending these
aforementioned harms. TCIEA aims to phase out existing 14(c)
certificates over a five-year period, prohibit the issuance of
new ones, and provide funding for grants that support
businesses with implementing best practices for the gradual
transition to CIE.\12\ TCIEA offers a realistic alternative to
subminimum wage.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Heigl, L., Knackstedt, K., & Sliva, E. (2024). (rep.). Pennies
on the Dollar: The Use of Subminimum Wage for Disabled Workers across
the United States. New America. Retrieved March 5, 2024, from https://
www.newamerica.org/education-policy/reports/the-use-of-subminimum-wage-
for-disabled-workers-across-the-us/momentum-to-change-the-subminimum-
wage/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Equality under the law, dignity for all, and true
competitive integrated employment cannot be achieved without
bringing employment law into the 21st century. For these
reasons, the Autistic Self Advocacy Network supports the
Transformation to Competitive Integrated Employment Act and the
steps it takes to help workers with disabilities reach their
full potential.
Thank you,
John Poulos, Policy Analyst
Autistic Self Advocacy Network
U.S. Senate Special Committee on Aging
"All Means All: Empowering People with Disabilities to Thrive in
Careers and the Workplace"
February 29, 2024
Statements for the Record
Association of University Centers on Disabilities (AUCD) Testimony
On behalf of the Association of University Centers on
Disabilities (AUCD), I am pleased to submit this Statement for
the Record regarding the Senate Special Committee on Aging's
hearing on February 29th, "All Mean All: Empowering People with
Disabilities to Thrive in Careers and in the Workplace".
In 1990, Congress enacted the Americans with Disabilities
Act (ADA) "to provide a clear and comprehensive national
mandate for the elimination of discrimination against
individuals with disabilities."\1\ Congress stated that the
"Nation's proper goals are to assure equality of opportunity,
full participation, independent living, and economic self-
sufficiency" for people with disabilities.\2\ Yet, over thirty
years after passage of ADA the promise to remove barriers to
employment for people with disabilities still remains to be
achieved. People with disabilities continue to experience
discrimination and numerous barriers to competitive integrated
employment (CIE).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 42 U.S.C. 12101(b)(1).
\2\ 42 U.S.C. 12101(a)(7).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Congress recognized in the ADA that society has
"historically...tended to isolate and segregate individuals
with disabilities, and, despite some improvements, such forms
of deinstitutionalization against individuals with disabilities
continue to be a serious and pervasive problem."\3\ While Title
I of the ADA addresses discrimination in employment by private
employers, Title II of the ADA protects a "qualified individual
with a disability from being "excluded from participation in or
being denied the benefits of services, programs, or activities
of a public entity"\4\ or being "subjected to discrimination by
any such entity."\5\ As directed by Congress, the Attorney
General promulgated regulations necessary to implement Title
II, including its integration mandate: "A public entity shall
administer services, programs and activities in the most
integrated setting appropriate to the needs of qualified
individuals with disabilities."\6\ Title II's integration
mandate reflects the recognition that "ntegration is
fundamental to the purposes of the Americans with Disabilities
Act. Provision of segregated accommodations and services
relegates people with disabilities to second-class status."\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ 42 U.S.C. 12101(a)(2).
\4\ 42 U.S.C. 12132.
\5\ Id
\6\ 28 C.F.R. 35.130(d).
\7\ 28 C.F.R. Pt.,App. B.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As you are aware, in 2014, Congress passed the Workforce
Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA).\8\ One of the purposes
of WIOA is "to increase, for individuals in the United States,
particularly those individuals with barriers to employment,
access to and opportunities for the employment, education,
training, and support services they need to succeed in the
labor market".\9\ Title IV of WIOA specifically focuses on
making amendments to the programs in the Rehabilitation Act of
1973 regarding the provision of employment services to people
with disabilities. WIOA prioritizes CIE, where people with
disabilities work in mainstream jobs alongside co-workers
without disabilities, and they are paid comparable wages.
Despite the goals included in the ADA, the definition of CIE in
WIOA recognizes two critical differences that make employment
for people with disabilities different from most people without
disabilities. Most people without disabilities go "to work" or
"are employed". The assumption for those people without
disabilities is that they will be integrated when they go to
work and will be paid a competitive wage. For many people with
disabilities, this has not been their reality, hence the need
for Congress to define CIE in WIOA.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ 29 U.S.C. 3101 et. Seq.
\9\ 29 U.S.C. 3101(1)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Low expectations are among the most significant barriers
for people with disabilities obtaining or maintaining CIE.
While progress has been made, thirty years after the ADA many
people with disabilities are still relegated to segregated
employment and/or subminimum wage employment, frequently known
as sheltered workshops, where they are isolated from co-workers
without disabilities and broader society and are legally paid
pennies on the dollar under Section 14(c) of the Fair Labor
Standards Act (FLSA).\10\ The Labor Force Participation Rate is
40.5% for people with disabilities, compared to 77.3% for
people without disabilities,\11\ and over 40,000 people with
disabilities continue to work in sheltered workshops under
14(c) certificates, currently held by 780 employers.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ 29 U.S. C. 214(c)
\11\ https://www.dol.gov/agencies/odep/research-evaluation/
statistics
\12\ https://www.dol.gov/agencies/whd/workers-with-disabilities/
section-14c/certificate-holders
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While numerous improvements are needed in the education
system, the vocational rehabilitation and other systems
providing services and supports to people with disabilities to
address the low employment participation rate for people with
disabilities, AUCD offers the following three suggestions for
immediate action by Congress to protect the civil rights of
people with disabilities and provide employers some of the
tools needed to employ people with disabilities in CIE.
Congress should immediately pass the Transformation to
Competitive Integrated Employment Act (H.R. 1263 /S. 533).
Section 14(c) of the Fair Labor Standards Act permits employers
to pay some people with disabilities less than the minimum
wage. This program is incompatible with the goals of the ADA
and WIOA. By maintaining section 14(c), Congress is endorsing
the perpetuation of a life of poverty and dependency for people
with disabilities who are paid subminimum wages. The continued
existence of this program creates a significant barrier to CIE
by holding some people with disabilities to the lowest
expectations as to their ability to work in CIE. The bill will
not only phase-out 14(c), but also provide employers with the
necessary support to transition their models from segregated
subminimum wage employment to one that supports CIE.
Congress should pass the Disability Employment Incentive
Act (S. 3076). Title I of the ADA states that employers of more
than 15 employees will not "discriminate against a qualified
individual on the basis of disability in regard to job
application procedures, the hiring, advancement, or discharge
of employees, employee compensation, job training, and other
terms, conditions, and privileges of employment." An employee
with a disability is considered qualified if they can perform
the essential functions of the job with or without reasonable
accommodations. While the ADA provides for reasonable
accommodations, obtaining accommodations and related
enforcement of the ADA continues to be a barrier to CIE. Human
resource professionals continue to lack knowledge about how to
provide reasonable accommodations and the costs for providing
them, as well as the impact of the accommodations on the
development of trust and the ability of workers with
disabilities to meet expectations of productivity. The bill
will enhance three existing tax credits to support employers
who hire people with disabilities and make workplaces more
accessible to those employees.
Congress should pass the Supporting Disabled Entrepreneurs
Act (S. 3528). The low labor force participation rate and
higher self-employment rates among people with disabilities
results in part from barriers to the labor market. People with
disabilities turn to self-employment and small business
development at a rate that is nearly twice that of people
without disabilities. There are more than 1.8 million business
owners with disabilities in the United States and many of these
business owners encounter unique barriers to becoming
entrepreneurs. These barriers keep people with disabilities
from pursuing work and, when they do pursue work, lack of
accommodations and discrimination in the workplace may prompt
them to launch their own enterprises. (https://
www.nationaldisabilityinstitute.org/reports/small-business-
ownership-pwd-challenges-and-opportunities/). To support
entrepreneurs with disabilities, the bill will require the
Small Business Administration to establish a Coordinator for
Disabled Small Business Concerns, collect voluntary demographic
data from program applicants on disability status; and publish
data on the participation of disabled entrepreneurs in SBA
programs.
AUCD is a national non-profit membership organization that
supports and promotes a national network of 143 university-
based interdisciplinary programs, including the University
Centers for Excellence in Developmental Disabilities (UCEDD),
Leadership Education in Neurodevelopmental Disabilities (LEND)
programs, and Eunice Kennedy Shriver Intellectual and
Developmental Disability Research Centers (IDDRC). AUCD members
conduct research, create innovative programs, provide training,
and disseminate information about best practices in the service
delivery system that support people with disabilities in every
state and territory. A significant portion of these programs
are in hospitals or medical schools. The programs serve as a
bridge between the university and the community, bringing
together the resources of both to achieve meaningful change.
AUCD is the essential conduit between university centers and
programs pursuing research, education, and services with the
disability community and the federal or state policymakers that
use this research to create policy that supports an equitable
quality of life for those living with a disability.
AUCD truly appreciates the efforts and leadership to ensure
every person with a disability can realize the goals of the
ADA, including the opportunity to be employed in the community
at or above minimum wage. If you have any questions, you can
reach our Policy Director.
Sincerely,
/s/
John Tschida, MPP Executive Director
U.S. Senate Special Committee on Aging
"All Means All: Empowering People with Disabilities to Thrive in
Careers and the Workplace"
February 29, 2024
Statements for the Record
Autism Society of America Testimony
Thank you for the opportunity to address this distinguished
Committee on the critical issue of empowering people with
disabilities to thrive in careers and the workplace. The focus
of my testimony is on the importance of affordable healthcare
access, the benefits of workplace accommodations, the
enhancement of transition planning and vocational
rehabilitation, discrimination in the workplace, the
implications of the Labor Department's Section 14(c) program,
and the contradictory situations created by public benefits
requirements.
The Autism Society of America is the nation's largest and
oldest grassroots organizations representing individuals with
Autism and their families. For 59 years and counting, the
Autism Society, including our nationwide network of 70
affiliates, connects people to the resources they need through
education, advocacy, support, information and referral, and
community programming, including employment support. We firmly
believe in empowering Autistic individuals by championing
integrated employment opportunities that focus not just on
providing a job, but a fulfilling experience as part of the
larger workforce. Throughout 2023, we hosted seven Listening
Sessions that have continued to inform the need for cross-
sector collaboration between educators, employers,
policymakers, and community partners to create a more equitable
and inclusive workforce.
The Importance of Affordable Healthcare Access:
Access to affordable healthcare is not just a necessity for
survival; it is also an important prerequisite for individuals
with disabilities to participate fully in the workforce and the
business community. The Affordable Care Act (ACA) has been
pivotal in ensuring that individuals with disabilities have the
healthcare support they need to be productive members of
society. The ACA prohibits discrimination based on pre-existing
conditions and provides essential health benefits that cover a
range of needs, including rehabilitative and habilitative
services. This security enables individuals with disabilities
to pursue entrepreneurship and employment without the fear of
losing their healthcare coverage. The Inflation Reduction Act
(IRA) extends the enhanced subsidies for health insurance
premiums under the ACA through 2025. These subsidies were
initially expanded under the American Rescue Plan and are
crucial for individuals with disabilities who may not have
access to employer-sponsored insurance and rely on the ACA
marketplace for their healthcare needs. The Affordable Care Act
must be protected and expanded. States that have not expanded
Medicaid under the ACA are denying their citizens critical
access to health care.
Medicaid offers comprehensive healthcare coverage that
includes services often not covered by private insurance, such
as personal care services, long-term care, and mental health
services. Medicaid also funds a variety of home and community-
based services (HCBS) that are important to working individuals
with Autism and other disabilities. HCBS can include personal
care assistance, home modifications, transportation services,
and employment support, all of which enable individuals with
disabilities to maintain employment and participate actively in
their communities. Congress must support and not cut or block-
grant Medicaid.
Many states offer Medicaid Buy-In programs for working
people with disabilities. These programs allow individuals to
earn income and, in some cases, have higher assets while still
retaining their Medicaid coverage. This is particularly
important because it addresses the "benefit cliff," where
individuals might otherwise lose their Medicaid coverage if
they earn more than the program's income limits. By allowing
individuals to work without losing their healthcare benefits,
Medicaid Buy-In programs encourage employment and financial
independence. Congress should consider mandating this program
for all states.
Discrimination and Section 14(c) of the Labor Department:
Recent data shows that approximately 85 percent of Autistic
adults with a college education are unemployed, and over 90
percent of adults with Autism are under-employed or unemployed.
Ableism, or discrimination against people with
disabilities, is a pervasive barrier in the workplace. It
manifests in hiring practices, workplace culture, and policies
like the Labor Department's Section 14(c) program. Section
14(c) of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), passed in 1938,
allows public and private employers to obtain special
certificates from the Department of Labor's Wage & Hour
Division that allow them to compensate workers with
disabilities at rates below the current federal minimum wage
based on the individual's level of measured productivity. This
results in a disproportionate number of individuals with Autism
and other developmental disabilities being automatically placed
into a sub-minimum wage position - usually in segregated
facilities - after exiting the public school system.
Individuals with developmental disabilities and their
families are often told there are no other options available to
them and are often pressured by public systems and service
provider agencies to enter into this option. It often has
little relationship with an individual's ability. These
workshops too often become terminal places of employment when
they are supposed to act as transitional employment to train
individuals. As few as 5% of workers transition into employment
in the community. Most do a poor job providing any independent
living or real-world job skills. With laws centered around
community inclusion and competitive integrated employment in
laws such as the ADA, Developmental Disabilities Act, and WIOA,
Section 14(c) is incompatible with current law and with the
expectations of people with disabilities.
We need to end the use of 14(c) and focus on providing
customized employment and other evidence-based supports to all
who need them. The Autism Society of America has been
advocating for the bipartisan Transformation to Competitive
Employment Act (TCIEA/HR 1263/S. 533), which provides grants to
states to help them build capacity to provide employment
opportunities that pay at least minimum wage. It phases out the
use of subminimum wage certificates and provides wrap-around
services for individuals who are unable to achieve full-time
competitive work.
In addition, we encourage Congress to support additional
tax incentives, such as the Disability Employment Incentives
Act (S. 3076), to incentivize employers to hire individuals
with disabilities. Another recently introduced bill the Autism
Society supports is the bipartisan Supporting Disabled
Entrepreneurs Act (S. 3528). This bill would establish the
position of Coordinator for Disabled Small Business Concerns
within the SBA, who would enhance support for small disability-
owned businesses across capital, counseling, and contracting
programs. The bill would also collect data on disability-run
small businesses and report recommendations to Congress.
Finally, the direct workforce crisis for people with
disabilities is impacting both the employment opportunities
available to individuals with disabilities and the quality of
the workforce dedicated to supporting them. As mentioned
previously, individuals with higher support needs rely on
direct support professionals to support them in jobs and in the
community. The Autism Society of America strongly urges
Congress to support the Better Care Better Jobs Act (S. 100/HR
547) and the HCBS Relief Act (S.3118). These bills would
increase payment rates to promote the recruitment and retention
of direct care workers, increase wages, and help to reduce
waiting lists for all community-based services.
The Benefits of Workplace Accommodations:
Workplace accommodations are often perceived as costly and
cumbersome by employers. However, studies consistently show
that the benefits far outweigh the costs. Employers benefit
from reduced turnover and increased productivity, making
workplace accommodation not just a legal obligation but a
strategic advantage. Some examples of accommodations for people
with Autism include: providing a clear structure and routine,
as many individuals with Autism thrive in structured
environments; creating a sensory-friendly workspace by
minimizing noise, bright lights, or strong smells that can be
overwhelming or distracting; offering flexible scheduling or
part-time work options if full-time work is challenging;
providing education and training to coworkers about Autism to
promote understanding and acceptance; offering communication
technology and use of other technology and tools that can aid
in organization, time management, and task completion;
tailoring tasks to the individual's strengths; and, allowing
for specialization in a particular area of interest or skill,
which can lead to high levels of productivity and job
satisfaction. It's important to note that Autism is a spectrum,
and each individual's needs and strengths are unique.
Therefore, accommodations should be personalized and regularly
reviewed to ensure they remain effective and relevant.
Improving Transition Planning and Vocational Rehabilitation:
Transition planning and vocational rehabilitation are
critical in preparing youth with Autism and other disabilities
for the workforce. However, a recent Drexel University Study
showed that 99% of people with Autism are not receiving VR or
any public employment supports.
These programs often lack a focus on customized supports
and matching individuals' abilities, strengths, and desires to
the needs of the employment sector. VR should train counselors
to better able discover individuals' strengths and to be better
able to understand the needs of businesses and employers. Self-
determination training is also crucial to many individuals with
Autism. Many need to better understand how to speak up for
themselves and learn independent living skills. Transition
planning should start as early as possible but at least by age
14.
The Catch-22 of Public Benefits and Workforce Participation:
Individuals with disabilities often find themselves in a
catch-22 situation when it comes to public benefits and
workforce participation. Earning too much can disqualify them
from crucial benefits like healthcare, housing, and
supplemental income, which are not easily replaced by
employment income, especially in entry-level positions.
Individuals often face a "benefit cliff," where earning more
income can lead to a disproportionate loss of benefits, such as
Medicaid or Supplemental Security Income (SSI). This creates a
disincentive to seek higher-paying jobs or work more hours, as
the loss of benefits can outweigh the financial gains from
employment. The ABLE Act has helped but more can be done.
Policymakers must work towards creating a benefits structure
that allows for a gradual transition, ensuring that individuals
with disabilities do not have to choose between healthcare and
employment.
Some of these barriers are addressed by the SSI Penalty
Elimination Act (HR 5408/S.2767), a bipartisan legislative
proposal aimed at reforming the Supplemental Security Income
(SSI) program. The primary focus of the Act is to eliminate or
reduce certain penalties and restrictions that are viewed as
overly punitive or as barriers to employment, financial
independence and stability for SSI recipients. S. 2280, Social
Security 2100 Act is another bill that addresses some of these
issues. This bill provides an across-the-board benefit
increase, improves the annual Cost-of-Living Adjustment (COLA)
to reflect people with disabilities and seniors' true costs,
repeals the Windfall Elimination Provision (WEP) and Government
Pension Offset (GPO) that currently penalizes many public
servants, and provides the Social Security Administration with
resources to improve customer service.
Conclusion
In conclusion, dismantling the structural barriers faced by
individuals with disabilities in the workforce and the business
world requires a multifaceted approach. It necessitates not
only legislative action and policy reform but also a cultural
shift toward recognizing and valuing the diverse capabilities
and contributions of individuals with Autism and other
disabilities. By supporting policies that foster an inclusive
environment, provide the necessary customized support, and
encourage acceptance, we can ensure that individuals with
Autism and other disabilities have equal opportunities to
thrive as workers.
Thank you for your attention to this critical issue. Please
contact Kim Musheno, Vice President of Public Policy
(kmusheno@autismsociety.org) with any questions.
U.S. Senate Special Committee on Aging
"All Means All: Empowering People with Disabilities to Thrive in
Careers and the Workplace"
February 29, 2024
Statements for the Record
Melwood Testimony
On behalf of Melwood and our nearly 1,400 employees across
Maryland, Virginia and Washington, D.C., including more than
750 employees with disabilities, I would like to express our
appreciation for your efforts to advance the conversation
around disability employment and inclusion through the hearing
today.
Melwood is a leading employer, advocate, and preferred
provider for people with disabilities. Our vision is a world
where people with disabilities are fully included. Melwood was
founded in 1963 by a group of parents of adult children with
disabilities who were told they had no chance at meaningful
employment. They were labeled untrainable and unemployable by
many. For the past 60 years, Melwood has proven those
assumptions wrong.
Melwood has extensive experience connecting people with
significant disabilities to employment. Through the AbilityOne
program, we employ people at high-level government contracting
sites, supporting teams and operations at the Department of
Justice, FBI, Secret Service, and even the Senate Childcare
Center. Through AbilityOne, we're partnering with a key
employer and influencer - the government - to be an example of
progress and inclusivity.
Melwood is proud to offer stable, meaningful employment
opportunities with self-sustaining wages and comprehensive
benefits to people with disabilities in the Washington, DC area
that build paths to independence and prioritize true inclusion.
We see and employ people with disabilities across a variety of
positions, industries and skill types and no matter the job, we
focus on empowering each individual to choose a career where
they feel set up for success.
In addition to our work in the AbilityOne Program, Melwood
has successfully partnered with private sector employers, non-
AbilityOne federal contractors, and federal agencies engaged in
direct hiring\1\ to create pipelines for talent, break down
barriers in the hiring process, and train leaders and managers
on how to create a workplace where everyone belongs and can be
successful. To build a world where people with disabilities are
fully included, we need to take a holistic approach engaging
and empowering people with disabilities through job training,
coaching and placement; partnering with employers and educating
teams at every level; and normalizing accommodations and
implementing workplace and benefit policies that are better at
enabling successful work.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Melwood has worked with MITRE and the National Geospatial
Intelligence Agency in support of the Neurodiverse Federal Workforce
pilot to engage neurodivergent talent for opportunities in the
intelligence community. NGA launches neurodiversity pilot: National
Geospatial-Intelligence Agency.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Melwood proudly advocates on behalf of our employees and
our community to explore and build greater opportunities to
work. We also advocate for federal, state, and local policies
that support fully inclusive workplaces and communities,
including fair and competitive pay, pipelines for career
exploration and advancement, and opportunities to build wealth,
such as access to ABLE accounts and addressing the benefits
cliff.
Unfortunately, for many people with disabilities throughout
the United States, this approach to disability employment and
inclusion is out of reach. The disability community has one of
the highest unemployment and underemployment rates in the
country. People with disabilities are far more likely to live
in poverty or experience economic hardships than their non-
disabled peers. This unfortunate trend reflects ongoing
misconceptions, lack of awareness and discrimination conscious
and unconscious against people with disabilities.
We must ensure that our laws reflect the inclusion that we
want to see in our workplaces and communities. To that end, we
need to make sure that outdated and unfair payment systems such
as Section 14(c) of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) of 1938
are eliminated. Simply put, this policy is rooted in the
outdated bigotry of low expectations. It has no place in modern
public discourse.
As one of the largest employers of people with disabilities
on the East Coast and as an employer that formerly held a 14(c)
certificate, we firmly believe Congress should act to end the
use of these certificates and embrace the future of disability
employment policy that acknowledges all the work over the past
many decades to improve opportunities for people to live, work,
and thrive in their communities.
Melwood and 14(c)
Melwood voluntarily gave up its 14(c) certificate nearly
ten years ago because we were committed to paying our employees
a fair wage and recognized the detrimental impacts the policy
had on the people we served. Today our bottom line has never
been better, our morale has never been higher, and our
productivity has never been greater. In fact, we pay an average
of $19.19 an hour and offer full benefits for our workforce, in
addition to providing job training, placement, and support
services for the broader community of people with disabilities.
To our employees, the 14(c) certificate was known as the
Time Trials Program. Melwood personnel would meet with
employees once each quarter to monitor their productivity by
observing and timing how long it took them to complete daily
work tasks, comparing that to a standard set by the time of
three non-disabled workers. The results of these intermittent
Time Trials would impact the workers hourly wages and,
consequently, determine their ability to provide for
themselves, their families, and their livelihood until the next
Time Trial.
The Time Trials did not take into consideration what type
of day the employee was having or whether an individual had
personal issues that may affect their ability to perform that
day. They did not take into account test anxiety or cognition
under stress or even whether the typically abled employee was
more experienced in the task. They did not include the
opportunity for an employee to receive training, assistance
and/or additional support if they could not meet the work
standards.
The Time Trials did not focus on a person as an individual,
except to determine how their productivity would be measured
against another person without a disability. Each quarter, Time
Trials reminded our employees about their disability and not
their ability to work or their value to the customer and to
society. Even employees who were consistently successful in
retaining 100% productivity experienced anxiety and shame from
witnessing other co-workers who had decreases in pay due to
Time Trials.
"It made my anxiety run high. You didn't know what to
expect. You don t know if you're going to pass or fail, and
whatever happened, it would change on your very next paycheck,
and then you had to figure out how to maintain your life on
that income until they decided to give you another time trial."
We have reports from our Vocational Support Specialists,\2\
who witnessed many employees feeling stress, anxiety, worry and
discouragement during Time Trials. One of our Vocational
Support Specialists described the experience for our employees
as:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ A Melwood Vocational Support Specialist provides work support
and coaching to individuals with disabilities to maximize their
opportunities for success in the workplace and in the community through
personal development, career growth, community integration, and
improved financial capacity.
"...living in a space of limbo, due to not knowing if
their hourly rate would be increased or decreased, and how that
would affect their ability to support themselves and their
families. The rather unfortunate and unfair aspect of Time
Trials is that our employees pay would be decreased, while
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
their job duties were not decreased."
Some of our federal customers banned the use of their
contract sites for Time Trials because of the productivity and
distraction concerns. Faced with all these concerns, Melwood
eliminated the use of 14(c).
In January of 2016, Melwood's leadership made a
recommendation to Melwood's Board of Directors to eliminate the
use of 14(c) altogether. Melwood's Board adopted the
recommendation and, on February 14, 2016, Melwood voluntarily
relinquished its 14(c) certificate. Today, we are recognized
nationally for our successful transition away from using
14(c)\3\ and none of our workers with disabilities earns less
than the minimum wage. In fact, the average wage for a direct
labor employee with a disability at Melwood is $19.19 an hour
and they also receive employee benefits including employer-paid
health insurance, non-elective retirement contributions, and
more.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Heigl, Knackstedt and Silva, Pennies on the Dollar: The Use of
Subminimum Wage for Disabled Workers across the United State, New
America, February 14, 2024. https://www.newamerica.org/education-
policy/reports/the-use-of-subminimum-wage-for-disabled-workers-across-
the-us/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Responding to Concerns to Eliminating 14(c)
The elimination of 14(c) certificates continues to be a
source of heated discussion, as community rehabilitation
providers still utilizing their certificate argue its
elimination will result in job losses for people with
disabilities. Many family members of these employees fear the
law's elimination will make it harder for their loved ones in a
society that is still not inclusive or accommodating of certain
disabilities.
With more than 750 people with disabilities on staff, I am
deeply sympathetic to these concerns, but I've also seen a
future beyond 14(c). We have proven that with proper training
and adequate support, people with disabilities can be employed
in competitive integrated employment without the need for
14(c). Today, nearly a decade from our decision to relinquish
our certificate, over 200 of the employees who worked for us
during that time remain employed by Melwood today, including
many who now lead teams and work in supervisory positions.
Since 2016, Melwood demonstrated that the financial cost of
discontinuing the use of the 14(c) program was not only
manageable, but also a prudent investment in our mission. We
have increased morale and employee satisfaction, and the
quality of our work on our contracts has increased.
Paying our employees fairly has not hampered Melwood's
business competitiveness or our ability to create job
opportunities for people with disabilities. To the contrary, we
now operate at more than 60 contract sites in Maryland, D.C.,
and Virginia, and continue to develop new business
opportunities to further our mission.
What guaranteeing a fair wage has done is demonstrate our
commitment to a world where people with disabilities are fully
included and treated equally in the American workforce. It has
allowed our employees to take charge of their lives, become
self-sufficient, and financially independent while reducing
reliance on public assistance or social safety net programs. A
2022 study from Virginia Tech, found that employment with
Melwood through the AbilityOne Program reduces government
spending by over $38,000 per person served per year. Primarily
because Melwood employees on AbilityOne contracts are on fewer
government benefits than they would otherwise be.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Assessing the Impacts of AbilityOne Program at Melwood, https:/
/melwood.org/newsroom/news/assessing-the-impacts-of-abilityone-study-
released-by-virginia-tech-and-melwood/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The use of the subminimum wage for people with disabilities
was initiated to prompt employers to offer opportunities in the
workforce to people who might otherwise not have been
considered employable. In the years since, Melwood and other
employers like our organization have defied those expectations
by recruiting, hiring, and training people with disabilities,
demonstrating that inclusion and support can provide meaningful
work opportunities to every person who wants to work and engage
in income generating activity.
Efforts to Eliminate 14(c)
After years of advocacy by nonprofit agencies, the
AbilityOne Program affirmatively moved to end the use of 14(c)
on AbilityOne contracts in October 2022. The Commission's
efforts to end 14(c) within AbilityOne were an important step
to modernize and align the program with modern disability
employment policy. The AbilityOne Program taking this
monumental step shows that the program continues to lead the
way with respect to disability employment.
Absent Congressional action on legislation that would
eliminate 14(c) nationally, states have also taken the lead to
abolish this practice. Since relinquishing our own 14(c)
certificate, Melwood leaders have educated and encouraged
legislators and the public to permanently abandon this
practice. Melwood helped lead the successful effort to
eliminate the subminimum wage in both Maryland and Virginia.
Fifteen states have passed legislation to phase out the
payment of subminimum wages to people with disabilities, mostly
recently the state of Kansas. However, this represents less
than half of the states in this country, which is why federal
legislation to eliminate the subminimum wage nationwide is a
long-overdue step for the disability community.
Conclusion
Melwood supports S. 533, The Transformation to Competitive
Integrated Employment Act, and we urge Congress to pass this
important piece of legislation. The legislation includes a
thoughtful and phased approach with additional resources and
technical assistance for organizations still utilizing these
certificates, ensuring that there will be a bridge to
employment opportunities and continued services to people with
disabilities currently earning below minimum wage.
There is a path for each person with a disability to find
employment that works for their individual needs and desires.
Whether that path is through employment opportunities like
those we offer, through supported employment opportunities, or
through entrepreneurship, people with disabilities deserve to
have choices and adequate support to engage in those efforts.
Sincerely,
Larysa Kautz,
President & CEO
Melwood
U.S. Senate Special Committee on Aging
"All Means All: Empowering People with Disabilities to Thrive in
Careers and the Workplace"
February 29, 2024
Statements for the Record
Alliance for Expanding America's Workforce (AEAW) Testimony
On behalf of the Alliance for Expanding America's Workforce
(AEAW), I would like to express our appreciation for you both
for holding the hearing today focused on increasing the
employment of people with disabilities and their inclusion in
the workplace.
The Alliance for Expanding America's Workforce is a
501(c)(4) with a focus on advocating for the utilization and
expansion of current federal procurement programs and federal
hiring processes to provide good and stable employment
opportunities for people with disabilities.
Our members provide competitive integrated employment
opportunities for people with disabilities including through
participation in the AbilityOne Program. Established back in
1938, the Program provides employment opportunities for people
who are blind or have significant disabilities through federal
contracting. It has been the most successful effort to provide
employment for people with disabilities with nearly 37,000
people employed through the Program for FY23.
The AbilityOne Program is a win-win for the federal
government. The Program provides high-quality goods and
services, that would already be procured, while simultaneously
offering employment opportunities to people with disabilities
and reducing their reliance on federal benefits. A 2022 study
conducted by Virginia Tech of Melwood, one of the founding
members of the Alliance, found that employment with Melwood
through the AbilityOne Program reduces government spending by
over $38,000 per person served per year. Primarily because
Melwood employees on AbilityOne contracts are on fewer
government benefits than they would otherwise be.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ "Assessing the Impacts of AbilityOne Program at Melwood,"
https://melwood.org/newsroom/news/assessing-the-impacts-of-abilityone-
study-released-by-virginia-tech-and-melwood/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A study conducted by Mathematica in 2023 of the AbilityOne
Program as a whole also found a positive correlation, that the
Program generates savings to the government through reduced
reliance on public programs and increased tax revenue.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ "Economic Impact of the AbilityOne Program." https://
www.sourceamerica.org/sites/default/les/2023-12/2023--FederalSaving--
Trifold-DIGITAL.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The AbilityOne Program has also led the way in ensuring
that people with disabilities can no longer be paid under
Section 14(c) for the Fair Labor Standards Act. In October
2022, the AbilityOne Program officially ended the use of 14c on
federal contracts, the first federal agency to do so, years
after NPAs called for its phase out and after many had already
given up their 14c certificates. The Alliance supports the
Transformation to Competitive Integrated Employment Act (S.
533) and urges Congress to pass this crucial piece of
legislation to ensure that people with disabilities are only
ever paid at least the minimum wage.
As model employers of people with disabilities, our members
can offer federal agencies best practices for inclusion and
retention of people with disabilities in the workplace. As
federal contractors, our members believe the federal government
can do more and that procurement can be leveraged to a greater
degree - through the AbilityOne Program, Section 503 of the
Rehabilitation Act and through the Small Business
Administration, to reduce unemployment and underemployment of
people with disabilities.
The Alliance supports the modernization of the AbilityOne
Program, revision of regulations and subregulatory guidance to
facilitate better coordination between AbilityOne contractors
and other federal contractors to help them meet their Section
503 hiring goals, a restart of the Section 503 Focus Review
Program and the establishment of a disabled-owned small
business program within SBA.
The government can also do more to meet its own hiring
goals under Section 501. Few agencies meet the goal 12% of an
agency's workforce being people with disabilities with a 2%
goal for individuals with "targeted" disabilities. They have
even less success retaining those workers. A CSR report from
November 2022 noted that employees with disabilities leave the
federal government at about three times the rate of those
without disabilities. Between 2011 and 2017, about 39% of
people with disabilities hired stayed less than a year and
about 60% stayed less than two years.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Congressional Research Service, "Federal Hiring of Persons with
Disabilities," November 28, 2022. https://crsreports.congress.gov/
product/pdf/R/R47316
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Alliance aims to build a world where people with
disabilities are fully included. We believe that an employee's
career aspirations should not be limited by anything other than
their imaginations. Our organizations have for decades enabled
people with disabilities to have access to and choice in the
type of career they want to pursue. To create the opportunities
people with disabilities deserve we must both eliminate
discriminatory practices and laws like 14(c) and leverage the
power of federal procurement to open a pipeline and facilitate
the transition of people with disabilities into the workforce.
Sincerely,
AEAW
U.S. Senate Special Committee on Aging
"All Means All: Empowering People with Disabilities to Thrive in
Careers and the Workplace"
February 29, 2024
Statements for the Record
Microsoft Testimony
We are grateful for the opportunity to offer Microsoft's
perspective on your recent hearing, "All Means All: Empowering
People with Disabilities to Thrive in Careers and the
Workplace." We appreciate the attention members of the U.S.
Senate Special Committee on Aging are paying to disability
employment.
Microsoft's mission, to empower every person and every
organization on the planet to achieve more, drives our
commitment to closing the disability divide.
Microsoft has worked to develop more accessible technology
across our industry and the economy, which is at a critical
starting point to ensure technology provides opportunities for
more people with disabilities to enter the workforce.
We believe subminimum wage is outdated, discriminatory, and
reinforcing a life of poverty, segregation, and dependency on
public support for people with disabilities. Microsoft supports
phasing out 14(c) with capacity-building for Community
Integrated Employment (CIE) and supports passage of the
Transformation to Competitive Employment Act (S. 533, H.R.
1263). S. 533 is bipartisan legislation providing states,
service providers, subminimum wage certificate holders, and
other agencies with the resources they need to create CIE
service delivery models and the inclusive wraparound services
some individuals with disabilities need when subminimum wage is
phased out.
Microsoft's believes the subminimum wage should be ended
for people with disabilities for the following reasons:
Subminimum wage is inconsistent with Microsoft's
mission to empower every person and every organization to
achieve more. Our mission cannot be achieved without the
talents of people with disabilities in the workforce. We
believe people with disabilities are a strength for the company
and a talent pool adding not only diversity but expertise and
empathy. We believe this makes our products, services, and
culture better. As individuals use technology, they are likely
to benefit from these contributions. For example, Swetha
Machanavajhala, a software engineer who is deaf, identified the
need to create the blurred background that is now widely used
during Microsoft Teams meetings because it allowed her to focus
on lip-reading with less distraction in the background. Our
book, "The Ability Hacks," shares the behind-the-scenes stories
of the hackers who pioneered two innovative hacks-turned-
solutions used today by people with disabilities around the
world.
Subminimum wage is contrary to Microsoft's values of
inclusion, which are reflected in its inclusive hiring
programs, such as the Supported Employment Program and the
Neurodiversity Hiring Program. These programs aim to create a
welcoming and accessible workplace for people with
disabilities, where they can thrive and grow in their careers.
We do not pay less than the applicable minimum wage, and we
require suppliers to make the same commitment. In 2019, we
added new language to our Supplier Code of Conduct to reconfirm
the obligation of all of Microsoft's suppliers to pay the
applicable minimum wage and to prohibit the holding of a 14c
certificate.
Subminimum wage is detrimental to Microsoft's
business interests because it limits the potential market and
customer base for its products and services. Microsoft's
accessibility features and tools are designed to empower
workers with disabilities to achieve more in their jobs and in
their lives. By supporting the transition from subminimum wage
and sheltered workshops to CIE, Microsoft can help create more
demand and opportunities for its accessibility solutions. We
share our experience supporting transitions and growing a
supported employment program in a series of free open access
tool kits and trainings.
Microsoft urges Congress to pass the Transformation to
Competitive Employment Act, ending subminimum wage for people
with disabilities, advancing employment equity, inclusion, and
accessibility for people with disabilities. Subminimum wage is
a relic of the past harming the dignity, rights, and potential
of people with disabilities, and CIE is the future that offers
opportunities, benefits, and support for workers with
disabilities, employers, and society.
We are grateful for the bipartisan leadership of this
Committee in support of the disability community. Thank you.
Sincerely,
Rylin Rodgers
Disability Policy Advisor, Microsoft Accessibility
U.S. Senate Special Committee on Aging
"All Means All: Empowering People with Disabilities to Thrive in
Careers and the Workplace"
February 29, 2024
Statements for the Record
The National Council on Disability (NCD) Testimony
Thank you for the opportunity to submit this Statement for
the Record on the issue of employment for people with
disabilities. The National Council on Disability (NCD) is an
independent federal agency that provides advice to the
Administration, Congress, and federal agencies based on our
comprehensive and objective analyses to inform policy
development, improvement, and enforcement efforts. As a federal
voice for 61 million Americans with disabilities, including
students with disabilities and their families, NCD is committed
to advancing policy solutions that create a more inclusive
society for people with disabilities.
Our statement for the record will focus on two topics
covered in the hearing: it will first highlight the disharmony
between the definition of competitive integrated employment
(CIE) and the AbilityOne Program and next, express NCD's
support for the passage of the Transformation to Competitive
Integrated Employment Act (S. 533).
NCD appreciates that a significant focus of this important
hearing highlighted the impact of CIE in transitioning people
with disabilities into successful jobs in the community. As you
are aware, the Javits Wagner O-Day Act, originally enacted in
1938, requires seventy-five percent of the direct labor hours
be completed by people who are blind or have a significant
disability. This requirement is in opposition to the definition
and codification of CIE in the Workforce Innovation and
Opportunity Act (WIOA), which defines CIE as a job that (1)
pays people with disabilities at least the minimum wage and not
less than the wage paid to people without disabilities for the
same or similar work, (2) is performed in a location where the
employee interacts with people without disabilities, and (3)
provides workers with disabilities the same opportunities for
career advancement as their coworkers without disabilities.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See Policies for the Past in a Modern Era: The Unintended
Consequences of the AbilityOne Program and Section 14(c) available at:
https://www.ncd.gov/report/policies-from-the-past-in-a-modern-era-the-
unintended-consequences-of-the-abilityone-program-section-14-c/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As advisors to the President, his administration, Congress,
and federal agencies on policy matters affecting persons with
disabilities, NCD has completed two reports that examine the
AbilityOne Program.\2\ NCD's 2020 report, Policies from the
Past in a Modern Era: The Unintended Consequences of the
AbilityOne Program in a Modern Era\3\ found that the program's
mandatory seventy-five percent direct labor hour ratio
inherently creates pressures on the AbilityOne non-profit
agencies to place workers with disabilities into more
segregated settings, whether as work crews or on the production
floor. This requirement undermines Congress's goals under CIE,
to promote inclusive employment opportunities for people with
disabilities in the community. As a result, NCD concluded that
the entire AbilityOne program perpetuates a separate system for
people who are blind or have significant disabilities while at
the same time modern federal laws seek to achieve greater
integration.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ NCD's 2020 report, Policies from the Past in a Modern Era: The
Unintended Consequences of the AbilityOne Program in a Modern Era,
available at: ncd-abilityone-2020 (2).pdf and NCD's 2019 report, A
Cursory Look at the AbilityOne Program, available at: a-cursory-look-
at-abilityone.pdf (ncd.gov).
\3\ ncd-abilityone-2020 (2).pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Additionally, NCD's report found that the AbilityOne
program has been unsuccessful in creating employment for people
who are blind or who have signifigant disabilities. Between FY
2011 and FY 2018, NCD found that the number of employees
working in the AbilityOne program declined from around 50,500
people to 44,000 people, and the number of hours worked
declined as well. More recently, the number of employees
working in the AbilityOne program declined to 39,690 in FY 2021
and 36,377 in FY 2022.\4\ According to the Commission figures,
twenty years ago in 2000, the annual combined revenue of
SourceAmerica and National Industries for the Blind was around
$40 million. Twenty-two years later, their combined revenue was
over $200 million. NCD found an unmistakable pattern of growth
in the program - but the growth has been in sales rather than
expanding employment opportunities for people with
disabilities. Given the numerous systemic problems, including
the clear tension between the AbilityOne program and the
definition of CIE, NCD concluded that the program could not be
modernize and instead, made recommendations that policymakers
phase-out the AbilityOne program over an eight-year period and
phase-in a new requirement under Section 503 that requires
federal contractors in general to hire a percentage of people
who are blind or have a significant disabilities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ See U.S. AbilityOne Commission Fiscal Year 2023 Performance and
Accountability Report available at: U.S. AbilityOne Commission FY23
Performance and Accountability Report.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Next, the Committee examined the Transformation to
Competitive Integrated Employment Act (S. 533), incorporates
many key findings from past NCD reports calling for systems
change and to phase-out Section 14(c) of the Fair Labor
Standards Act (14(c). NCD's 2012 report, National Council on
Disability Report on Subminimum Wage and Supported
Employment\5\ called upon policymakers to phase-out 14(c) while
implementing a conversion or transformation strategy that would
expand opportunities to transition away from the segregated
subminimum wage model perpetuated under 14(c). NCD's follow-up
investigation, published in our 2018 report, National
Disability Employment Policy, From the New Deal\6\ to the Real
Deal, found no improvement to the program and reiterated our
previous recommendations again calling on policymakers to
implement a mechanism for systems change.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ ncd-subminimum-wage-supported-employment-2012.pdf.
\6\ ncd--new--deal--to--real--deal.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Many of the TCIEA's provisions are consistent with the
recommendations outlined in NCD's 2012 and 2018 reports. In
addition to a multi-year phase-out of 14(c), this bill would
provide states and individual providers with resources from
subject-matter experts to transform their business and program
models away from the outdated subminimum wage model and into a
new model that supports opportunities to enter competitive
integrated employment. It also incentivizes providers that have
already demonstrated success in transitioning to the new work
model to compete for technical assistance grants to assist
other providers and states throughout their transformation
efforts.
NCD thanks members of the Senate's Special Committee on
Aging for holding this important hearing on the employment of
people with disabilities. This issue is of great interest and
concern to NCD, and we look forward to working with and being a
resource to members of the Senate Special Committee on Aging as
you pursue your work on this crucial issue.
FOR MORE INFORMATION, CONTACT: Kimie Eacobacci, Legislative
Affairs Specialist
U.S. Senate Special Committee on Aging
"All Means All: Empowering People with Disabilities to Thrive in
Careers and the Workplace"
February 29, 2024
Statements for the Record
National Council on Independent Living (NCIL) Testimony
Thank you for hosting this hearing and for the opportunity
to provide this statement in support of the importance of
competitive integrated employment and the elimination of
subminimum wage for people with disabilities.
The National Council on Independent Living (NCIL) is the
oldest cross-disability, national grassroots organization run
by and for people with disabilities. NCIL's membership includes
people with disabilities, Centers for Independent Living,
Statewide Independent living Councils, and other disability
rights organizations. As a membership organization, NCIL
advances independent living and the rights of people with
disabilities through consumer-driven advocacy. NCIL envisions a
world in which people with disabilities are valued equally and
participate fully.
The independent living movement has long opposed the use of
the 14(c) certificates and advocated for competitive integrated
employment opportunities. Employers use 14(c) certificates to
pay disabled people subminimum wages that are often far lower
than the minimum wage - sometimes just pennies per hour. This
work is often done in segregated settings such as sheltered
workshops and, while the 14(c) program was established to be a
steppingstone to competitive employment for people with
disabilities, we now know that most people employed in
segregated settings remain there and never leave to take jobs
in the community.
Expanding competitive integrated employment is critical to
ensuring disabled people have the opportunity to earn the same
wages and have the same opportunities as their nondisabled
coworkers. It is also critical to ensuring they can work in the
community, alongside non-disabled workers, rather than in
segregated settings.
Since their inception Centers for Independent Living have
played a vital role in assisting consumers with diverse
disabilities in transitioning into competitive integrated
employment. Employment support can be woven into all five core
services that CILs are federally mandated to provide and CILs
have demonstrated success providing both job coaching and
training and the independent living skills training and
supports necessary to maintain the employment. Additionally,
several CILs such as ABLE South Carolina have played a critical
role in assisting the phase out of 14(c) certificates in their
states.
No other minatory group is exempt from fair labor laws
purely by virtue of their minority status be it race, sexual
orientation, gender, circumstances of birth, or any other
identity which an individual brings to the workplace. Paying
people subminimum wages and segregating them on the basis of
disability is discrimination. Both practices create barriers to
future employment opportunities and contribute to the
disproportionate rates of poverty among disabled people.
NCIL strongly supports the passage of the Transformation to
Competitive Employment Act, advancing competitive integrated
employment opportunities and the elimination of subminimum
wages for people with disabilities.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide this statement. If
you have any questions, please contact NCIL's Director of
Advocacy and Public Policy Jessica Podesva.
U.S. Senate Special Committee on Aging
"All Means All: Empowering People with Disabilities to Thrive in
Careers and the Workplace"
February 29, 2024
Statements for the Record
National Disability Institute (NDI) Testimony
National Disability Institute (NDI) is the first and only
disability rights organization committed to building a better
financial future for people with disabilities and their
families by achieving financial security and independence. We
submit this statement for the record regarding the U.S. Senate
Special Committee on Aging hearing on "All Means All:
Empowering People with Disabilities to Thrive in Careers and
the Workplace."
NDI applauds the Special Committee for its focus on
improving economic outcomes and financial wellbeing for people
with disabilities in the workforce, including entrepreneurs and
small business owners with disabilities.
People with disabilities currently face substantial
barriers to employment, workforce development opportunities,
and higher education and vocational training programs. Lack of
equal access and opportunity translates into poor economic
outcomes across the lifespan as well as marginalization from
the economic mainstream. People with disabilities are twice as
likely to live in poverty and about twice as likely to be
unemployed as people without disabilities. Within that umbrella
group, people with specific types of disabilities, such as
those with intellectual and developmental disabilities, face
even higher rates of poverty and unemployment, even with
increased educational attainment. Our work with the Asset
Funders Network has also called attention to significant
disparities in net wealth, housing, and income among people
with disabilities when disaggregated by race, ethnicity, and
gender, with Black women with disabilities facing some of the
sharpest disparities. Further, people with disabilities are
overrepresented in the homeless and incarcerated populations,
and those who are currently or formerly homeless or who have
criminal records face additional barriers to accessing
employment.
However, the outlook is not entirely dire. We know from
experience that people with disabilities can thrive as
employees in competitive integrated employment in every sector
of the economy and while performing every type of job function
at every level of seniority, when provided with Building a
better financial future for people with disabilities and their
families. necessary accommodations, job coaching, and other
support as needed. People with disabilities have long been
innovators and pioneers, if only because we have to live in a
world largely not designed around our needs. When hired into
competitive integrated employment opportunities, employees with
disabilities have lower rates of absenteeism and greater
loyalty to their employers. Likewise, entrepreneurs and small
business owners with disabilities build business enterprises
that create jobs, grow the economy, and provide a wide range of
goods and services, including many that open opportunities for
consumers with disabilities through accessible and inclusive
design, marketing, and services delivery. These business
enterprises may cater to people with disabilities in some
cases, but they are just as likely, if not more likely, to
provide their goods and services to the general public.
Disabled-owned enterprises include, among many others,
marketing and communications firms, novelty and print shops,
bakeries and restaurants, disability services agencies,
performance arts ensembles, automotive repair and restoration
services, health clinics, bespoke tailor shops, software
development companies, and political consulting firms.
Our work has shown that a greater percentage of people with
disabilities choose entrepreneurship as a path to economic
security than do people without disabilities. Some disabled
entrepreneurs may do so because they have faced discrimination
in hiring and on the job. Others may do so because self-
employment allows for flexible working conditions that meet
their access needs. Disabled-owned enterprises span the gamut
from sole proprietorships to small businesses with hundreds of
employees across multiple states. Business owners with
disabilities are also more likely to understand the needs of
employees and customers with disabilities. Importantly,
business owners with disabilities frequently choose to hire or
contract with workers with disabilities, increasing the overall
attainment of competitive integrated employment and higher
wages for employees with disabilities. Supporting entrepreneurs
and small business owners with disabilities ultimately
increases the rate of disability employment and injects money
into local economies, reducing reliance on publicly funded
benefits and stimulating economic growth.
Nonetheless, people with disabilities do not yet have equal
access to the resources and tools needed to guarantee success
in employment or entrepreneurship. Currently, the Small
Business Administration does not have an office dedicated to
supporting small business owners with disabilities. Likewise,
existing business development and sole proprietorship resources
often lack information specific to people with disabilities,
including information about programs such as assistive
technology grants, tax credits for architectural modifications
increasing accessibility, Medicaid buy-in programs for working
people with disabilities, or benefits counseling for those
receiving public benefits. Entrepreneurs and small business
owners with disabilities may also have less access to capital
and financial education around investment opportunity, business
structure and tax implications, and access to credit without
specialized and disability-conscious resources. Lack of access
to startup capital and business credit can hamper a prospective
business owner from the start and set up entrepreneurs with
disabilities to fail instead of providing tools for success.
People with disabilities seeking competitive, integrated
employment opportunities also routinely face discrimination
simply when trying to enter and stay in the workforce. Hiring
discrimination can be as casual as job ads requiring the
ability to walk and lift 50 pounds for positions that can be
done entirely sitting down or job sites not permitting a
candidate to bring a service animal to an interview. Many now
face heightened discrimination in all sectors through
employers' increasing use of automated hiring tools that tend
to screen out candidates with disabilities or are outright
inaccessible for disabled users. Once hired, employees with
disabilities may still struggle to keep their jobs, may be
denied reasonable accommodations requests, or may be denied
opportunities for professional development, advancement, and
promotions. Other employees with disabilities may choose to
stay in low-paying jobs or in workplaces that are inaccessible
or even explicitly hostile because they depend on access to the
employer-sponsored health plan or risk prolonged unemployment
and homelessness if they lose their primary income source.
These realities are untenable.
NDI believes in a future where all people with disabilities
have the same opportunities and choices as everyone else,
including the ability to make meaningful decisions about where
to work and live and whether to work for an employer or choose
small business ownership or entrepreneurship. This means a
future where people with disabilities have not only economic
security but are empowered to participate fully in the economic
mainstream. People with disabilities deserve to have the full
range of economic choices as nondisabled people do, which
requires increasing access to competitive integrated employment
opportunities and supporting entrepreneurship and small
business ownership. Achieving these goals will require
proactive legislative action to ensure that entrepreneurs and
employees with disabilities have the support and resources they
need to succeed, including removing discriminatory barriers to
opportunity as both individual workers and as business owners.
The Special Committee can advance legislation that will
improve the regulatory landscape for entrepreneurs and
employees with disabilities, making employment and small
business ownership more attainable and sustainable for people
with disabilities. We encourage the Special Committee to
consider the following barriers and opportunities for
supporting entrepreneurs and employees with disabilities: Q03
Advancing the Supporting Disabled Entrepreneurs Act to
establish a coordinator for disabled small business concerns
within the Small Business Administration;
Directing the Small Business Administration to collect
data on disabled-owned enterprises, as in the Supporting
Disabled Entrepreneurs Act, including coordinating with the
General Services Administration to promote federal contracting
opportunities for disabled-owned enterprises;
Directing the Small Business Administration to establish
programs providing assistance or referrals to entrepreneurs and
small business owners with disabilities regarding taxes and
public benefits;
Directing the Small Business Administration to provide
information to small business owners regarding assistive
technology grant programs for employers and tax credits for
architectural modifications to benefit employees with
disabilities;
Encouraging coordination between the Small Business
Administration and vocational training, work readiness, and job
placement programs for people with disabilities funded or
coordinated by the Departments of Labor, Education, and Health
and Human Services;
Supporting elimination of Section 14(c) of the Fair
Labor Standards Act that permits payment of subminimum wages
while concurrently supporting shifts in funding priorities to
programs that encourage transition to competitive integrated
employment and greater financial independence for people with
disabilities;
Encouraging the federal government to fulfill its
commitment to serving as a model employer of people with
disabilities through targeted hiring, expanding hires under the
Schedule A excepted hiring authority, and establishing hiring
pipelines for transitioning youth with disabilities and
displaced workers with disabilities;
Encouraging the Small Business Administration to
coordinate with state administrators of Medicaid buy-in
programs and marketplace health plans to provide educational
resources for entrepreneurs and small business owners with
disabilities; and
Funding programs to connect entrepreneurs and small
business owners with disabilities to mentorship and startup
capital opportunities, as well as continuing business financial
education.
People with disabilities are eager to work and to compete
in the small business arena, demonstrating our talents,
ambition, and potential. By supporting disabled workers and
entrepreneurs, we not only empower individuals to fulfill their
dreams, but also enrich our economy with diverse talents and
perspectives.
NDI thanks the Special Committee again for the opportunity
to provide this statement for the record. If any members of the
Special Committee have further questions, we would be glad to
assist in any way that we can.
Sincerely,
Thomas Foley, Executive Director
Lydia X. Z. Brown, Director of Public Policy
Nikki Powis, Director of Small Business Programs
U.S. Senate Special Committee on Aging
"All Means All: Empowering People with Disabilities to Thrive in
Careers and the Workplace"
February 29, 2024
Statements for the Record
Susan M. Harrell Testimony
Support Statement
I have spent the last 39 years focusing on Competitive
Integrated Employment (CIE) for individuals with Intellectual
and Developmental Disabilities (IDD), as a provider of
Competitive Integrated Employment Services, then as a private
consultant to non-profit and government agencies surrounding
this topic, and now as the Assistant Executive Director of a
training and technical assistance non-profit. I have extensive
experience in developing CIE employment structures and
opportunities within an array of government and private sector
workplaces both small and large; addressing public benefits and
CIE issues with policy makers and with beneficiaries of public
benefits and services; and providing training and technical
assistance to organizations and schools which provide job
related services and supports. I also have a brother who
receives IDD services, so this topic is near and dear to my
heart.
Following the Senate Aging Committee Hearing on Empowering
People with Disabilities at Work, I am submitting a statement
in support of Competitive Integrated Employment for individuals
with IDD. I am in support of the Transformation to Competitive
Integrated Employment Act (TCIEA). Nearly 40 years after broad
national integrated employment efforts began for individuals
with Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities, I am thrilled
that renewed national efforts, such as the TCIEA, are focused
on assuring individuals with the most significant disabilities
receive the necessary services and supports to acquire and
maintain competitive integrated employment across the country.
Efforts toward CIE began in 1985 and resulted in
Rehabilitation Act amendments in 1986. These amendments more
clearly defined the focus of the competitive employment efforts
to individuals with severe handicaps for whom competitive
employment has not traditionally occurred and who, because of
their handicap need ongoing support services to perform such
work.
Many of the issues identified in a report prepared by the
National Association of Mental Retardation Program Directors
(NAMRPD) in 1987\1\ are still largely in play today. In August
1999, the DHHS Office of Inspector General (OIG) issued a
report: Employment Programs for Persons with Developmental
Disabilities\2\ which also identified issues which impede the
growth of outcomes in CIE for working age adults with IDD.
Specific areas identified included challenges with
transportation, access to appropriate support services, lack of
employer engagement, fears around loss of benefits, and
insufficient family supports and wrap around services, which
are all challenges to achieving CIE today.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://mn.gov/mnddc/parallels2/pdf/80s/87/87-SEM-NAR.pdf
\2\ https://oig.hhs.gov/oei/reports/oei-07-98-00260.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These challenges are all clear indicators that new
strategies are needed to assure that, after nearly 40 years,
CIE for working age adults with intellectual and developmental
disabilities becomes the standard expectation and the outcomes
reflect that this expectation has become reality for most
people with IDD. There are several key areas I would like to
address in terms of additional strategies for elevating the
success of individuals in CIE.
Refining the Definition and Criteria for CIE
It has been 10 years since the Workforce Innovation and
Opportunities Act (WIOA) became Public Law. WIOA defined
Competitive Integrated Employment as work performed on a full
time or part time basis with four key measures or indicators.
In the time since, many States have redoubled their efforts to
place individuals with I/DD and other significant disabilities
within community workplaces. However, there remains resistance
and debate about the definition and criteria surrounding CIE.
  T6479.001
Data to Inform Progress
Tracking progress and setting goals is essential to overall
efforts to transform services in support of CIE. Use of state
or national prevalence rates of IDD for the focal age group can
inform and measure progress toward achieving CIE for
transitioning students and adults with disabilities.
Encouraging use of the prevalence rate in measuring employer
driven efforts in DEI hiring would also be effective in growing
employer demand for employment of individuals with IDD within
Federal, State, and other governmental organizations as well as
within private sector entities.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Lynda Lahti Anderson, Sheryl A Larson, Sarah Mapel Lentz,
Jennifer Hall-Lande: A Systematic Review of US Studies on the
Prevalence of Intellectual or Developmental Disabilities Since 2000;
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31568738/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unfortunately, it is difficult to determine the prevalence
rate, as studies conducted over the last 30 or more years
indicate a range of estimates of the prevalence of IDD among
adults.\4\ A thorough study of the prevalence rate needs to be
conducted to better understand and drive progress towards an
outcome of CIE among working age adults with IDD.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ T. W. Benevides, B. Datta, J. Jaremski, M. McKee: Prevalence of
intellectual disability among adults born in the 1980s and 1990s in the
United States; https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jir.13119
"It is estimated that approximately 41% of adults with
intellectual and developmental disability (IDD) are served
through the developmental disabilities (DD) system in the US.
The remaining 59% include individuals who meet diagnostic
criteria but are not actively receiving paid services or may
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
not be known to the DD system."
"...the estimated prevalence of DD ranges significantly
and is dependent on the definition used. Whereas the definition
used by the CDC has reported prevalence rates of DD between 16%
(Boyle et al., 2011) to 18% (Zablotsky et al., 2019) of the US
population, the function-based DD Act definition of DD with a
high severity threshold has yielded prevalence estimates of
approximately 2% of the US population (Larson et al., 2001).\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Margaret Rosencrans, Marc J. Tass, Minje Kim, Gloria L. Krahn,
Alexandra Bonardi, Paula Rabidoux, Mary Lou Bourne, Susan M. Havercamp:
Invisible populations: Who is missing from research in intellectual
disability?. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/
S0891422221002663
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Key Federal Agency Partnerships:
I recommend the following Federal Agencies be engaged in
activities to transform and expand CIE for individuals with
IDD.
CMS:
Medicaid eligibility: Assure that States are aware of
the flexibilities which exist within the HCBS Medicaid
eligibility groups. This would include promoting and utilizing
the flexibility available within Medicaid Buy In programs to
address concerns individuals and families have when income
increases in CIE vs. 14c. States can elect to eliminate income
and resource thresholds for eligibility, while maintaining
premium payment based on income for maintaining eligibility.
This would address the fears of individuals and parents when it
comes to considering competitive wages from employment.
Change to available Medicaid Buy In eligibility
flexibilities: Allow eligibility for Ticket to Work Medicaid
Buy In to include those who have retired and receive retirement
income such as through a Pension, SSA Retirement, 401K, and
403b. Unfortunately, those who have been employed and would
enjoy income or benefits saved or earned through various
retirement avenues during their working years, struggle to
maintain Medicaid and Medicaid Waiver services and supports.
Access to a Medicaid Buy In option is essential in addressing
this issue. It would require the age threshold and employment
requirement be eliminated for retirees to continue to access
this essential Medicaid avenue in support of CIE and the
benefits acquired during employment through their retirement
years.
Wrap around services: Assure that CMS reinforces with
states the utilization of a variety of areas of the HCBS
waivers and State Plan Medicaid Services concurrently in
support of employment, residential and other needs associated
with inclusion within the community. Tapping into wrap around
service such as personal care, technology, transportation, and
other supports across all parts of an individual's life within
community settings will help to reduce the resistance
individuals and family members have surrounding the transition
to CIE from Sheltered Employment and day habilitation services.
Key relevant concerns involve fears that parents or other
family members will be required to support the individual more,
in turn sacrificing their own careers, if employment does not
fall into a predictable 9-5, Mon through Friday schedule.
Settings Rule: Utilize the prevalence rate of IDD within
community as a measure of whether a setting is considered to
meet the integration standard.
SSA:
Access to benefits information: Assure that working
individuals have information from SSA promptly to understand
the impact of employment on cash benefits. Assure that SSA
provides comprehensive information to individuals seeking
Benefits Planning Queries (BPQYs) about all SSA benefits, as
individuals with disabilities may draw benefits from the
records of parents as well as their own record, along with SSI,
and currently this comprehensive benefits information is not
provided.
Limit liability for overpayment of benefits: The amount
the individual is required to repay should be limited to 10% of
their income for an overpayment which occurs through no fault
of the individual. These situations should not require the
individual to appeal or request a waiver of the overpayment of
the benefits. This is one of the greater obstacles in
addressing the fears of individuals and families surrounding
CIE.
Broader promotion of the Student Earned Income
Exclusion: SSA should promote use of the Student Earned Income
Exclusion as an important SSI work incentive which students and
disabilities can access to exclude earnings from countable
income up to the age of 22. This will help the student become
familiar with work incentives and promote paid employment
experiences for students. Every SSI recipient who is under the
age of 22 should be provided information about this important
work incentive.
Department of Education/OSERS/Technology Education:
Provide information and resources for state and local
schools: which promotes early job trials and discovery
activities and development of portfolios and paid work for
students to leverage as they move into adult funded services.
This can significantly improve CIE outcomes, as the interests,
skills and gifts of a student are identified, engagement in the
community and within workplaces has occurred, and the student
and family are engaged and have an expectation for employment.
Highlight and reinforce Person-Centered Planning: as
essential in all phases of the transition years, so that
current information informs the planning as a student moves
through Career Awareness, Career Exploration, Career
Preparation and Career Placement. Access to technology and
transportation is an integral, yet often overlooked part of
transition planning.
Require training and monitoring requirements surrounding
use of and access to technology to expand career exploration
and employment options: Technology training for teachers and
other school staff is essential for incorporating technology in
an innovative and effective manner throughout the transition
years for students with disabilities. Since technology is
advancing at a rapid pace, ten hours of continuing education
about this educator training topic should be required at least
once every three to five years. Standards should be developed
to assure technology (hardware) which specifically meets the
student's needs for working and living within the community
should transfer with the student as they exit school services.
Parents often do not understand the importance of students
accessing Social Security and Medicaid benefits to increase
independence and access to services as the student enters
adulthood. Students and parents are also often unclear about
the role, purpose of, and when/how to use VR and IDD state
agency services for supporting CIE and to further living and
connecting in all parts of the community.
Collecting success stories and information about resources
and strategies, and sharing of these broadly will help schools,
students, and families to build the knowledge and expectations
at the local, state, and national level.
Both IDEA and WIOA make clear that transition services
require a coordinated set of activities for a student with a
disability within an outcome-oriented process. This process
promotes movement from school to post-school activities such as
postsecondary education, vocational training, and competitive
integrated employment.
All Federal Agencies (Federal Hiring):
Set specific goals: for and reporting requirements
specific to the hiring of individuals with IDD in CIE through
Schedule A Hiring Authorities
Set a targeted hiring goal specifically for individuals
with IDD in CIE within Federal Agencies: Use a newly
established prevalence rate of IDD (as discussed above) to set
the hiring goal and require Federal Agencies to report annually
on progress toward this goal. Individuals with IDD are
typically excluded in the Schedule A hiring efforts, in part
because Federal Agencies need to consider how best to develop
meaningful position descriptions and modify recruitment and
hiring practices to assure jobs within Federal Agencies are
attainable for individuals with IDD.
Additional information: Schedule A Hiring Brief
2.1.24.docx
Finally, in the interest of assuring that there is
information to help inform families of the promise of CIE for
all individuals with IDD, I recommend that video and written
testimonials from individuals with IDD, their family members,
and employers be collected and disseminated by DOL, SSA, CMS
and DOE to drive the expectation that CIE is achievable and
desirable for all working aged adults with IDD.
Conclusion
Thank you, Senator Casey, and Senator Braun, for the
opportunity to provide written testimony. I am hopeful that
renewed focus on CIE will allow individuals with IDD to take
their rightful place as contributing and valued employees
alongside the diverse array of individuals within the
workforce.
